 Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
 
ACT NO. V OF 1908  
[21st March 1908]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the Procedure of the Courts of Civil 
Judicature.  
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate  and amend the laws relating to the procedure of 
the Courts of Civil Judicature; It is hereby enacted as follows: -  
 
PRELIMINARY  
1.-(l) This Act may be cited as the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
 
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of January 1 909.  
1[(3) It extends to the whole of Pakistan.]  
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, -  
(1) "Code" includes rules:  
(2) "decree" means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the 
court ex pressing it, conclusively determines the rights of the parties which regard to all or 
any of the matters in controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or final. It 
shall be deemed to include the rejection of a plaint 2[the determination of any q uestion 
within section 144 and an order under rule 60, 98, 99, 101, or 103 of Order XXI] but shall 
not include;  
(a) any adjudication form which an appeal lies as an appeal from an order, or  
(b) any order of dismissal for default.  
Explanation. - A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before 
the suit can be completely dispose of. It is final when such adjudication completely 
disposes of the suit. It may be partly preliminary and partly final;  
(3) "Decree -holder" means any person i n whose favour a decree has been passed or an 
order capable of execution has been made:  
(4) "District" means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a principal civil Court of 
original jurisdiction (hereinafter called a "District Court"), and includes the local limits of 
the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of a High Court:  

(5) "Foreign Court" means a Court situate beyond the limits of 1[Pakistan] which has no 
authority in 1[Pakistan] and is not established or continued by 2[the Central Government 
3***] : 
(6) "Foreign judgment" means the judgment of a foreign Court:  
(7) "Government Pleader" Includes any officer appointed by the 4(Provincial 
Government] to perform all or any of the functions expressly imposed by this Code on 
the Government Pleader and also  any pleader acting under the directions of the 
Government Pleader :  
(8) "Judge" means the presiding officer of a civil Court:  
(9) "Judgment" means the statement given by the Judge of the grounds of a decree or 
order:  
(10) "Judgment -debtor" means any perso n against whom a decree has been passed or an 
order capable of execution has been made:  
(11) "Legal representative" means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased 
person, and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceas ed and 
where a party sues or is sued in a representative character the person on whom the estate 
devolves on the death of the party so suing or sued:  
(12) "Mesne profits" of property means those profits which the person in wrongful 
profession of such prope rty actually received or might with ordinary diligence have 
received therefrom, together with interest on such profits but shall not include profits due 
to improvements made by the person in wrongful possession:  
(13) "Movable property" includes growing cro ps: 
(14) "Order" means the formal expression of any decision of a civil Court which is not a 
decree:  
(15) "Pleader" means any person entitled to appear and plead for another in Court, and 
includes an advocate, a civil and an attorney of a High Court:  
(16) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules:  
(17) "Public officer" means a person falling under any of the following descriptions, 
namely:  
(a) every Judge;  
(b) [every person in the service of Pakistan].1  

(c) every commissioned or gazetted officer in the militar y, 2[naval or airy] forces of 
3[Pakistan while in the service of the State];  
(d) every officer of a Court of Justice whose duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or 
report on any matter of law or fact, or to make, authenticate or keep any document, or  to 
take charge or dispose of any property, or to execute any judicial process, or to 
administer any oath, or to interpret, - or to preserve order, in the Court, and every person 
especially authorized by a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties;  
(e) every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or 
keep any person in confinement;  
(f) every officer of 4[the 5[Government] ] whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent 
offences, to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the 
public health, safety or convenience;  
(g) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any 
property on behalf of 4[the 5[Government]], or to make any survey, assessment or 
contrac t on behalf of '[the 2(Government] 1. or to execute any revenue -process, or to 
investigate, or to report on, any matter affecting the pecuniary interests of 1[the 
2[Government], or to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to the pecuniary 
intere sts of 1[the [Government] ] or to prevent the infraction of any law for the protection 
of the pecuniary interest of 1[the 2[Government] ]; and  
(h) every officer in the service or pay of 1[the 2[Government]], or remunerated by fees or 
commission for the per formance of any public duty:  
(18) "Rules" means rules and forms contained in the First Schedule or made under 
section 122 or section 125.  
(19) "Share in a corporation" shall be deemed to include stock, debenture -stock, 
debentures or bonds; and  
(20) "Signed ", save in the case of a judgment or decree, includes stamped.  
3. For the purposes of this Code, the District Court is subordinate to the High Court, and 
every civil Court of' a grade inferior to that of a District Court and every Court of Small 
Causes is subordinate to the High Court and District Court.  
4.-(l) In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, nothing in this Code shall 
be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any special or local law now in force or any 
special jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by 
or under any other law for the time being in force.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the proposition contained in 
subsection (1), nothing in this Code shall be deemed to  limit or otherwise  

affect any remedy which a landholder or landlord may have under any law for the time 
being in force for the recovery of rent of agricultural land from the produce of such land.  
5.-(1) Where any Revenue Courts are governed by the provis ions of this Code in those 
matters of procedure upon which any special enactment applicable to them is silent, the 
3[Provincial Government]4 * * * may, by notification in the 5(official Gazette], declare 
that any portions of those provisions which are not expressly made applicable by this 
Code shall not apply to those Courts, or shall only apply to them with such modifications 
as the 3[Provincial Government]*** may prescribe.  
(2) "Revenue Court" in subsection (1) means a Court having jurisdiction under any local 
law to entertain suits or other proceedings relating to the rent, revenue or profits of land 
used for agricultural purposes, but does not include a civil Court having original 
jurisdiction under this Code to try such suits or proceedings as being sui ts or proceedings 
of a civil nature.  
6. Save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided, nothing herein contained shall 
operate to give any Court jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subject -matter 
of which exceeds the pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary jurisdiction.  
7. The following provisions shall not extend to Courts cons - Provincial Small Cause 
Courts Act, 1887, 1*** or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small 
Causes Courts 3[under the said Act], that is to say, - 
(a) So much of the body of the Code as relates to - 
(i) Suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes;  
(ii) The execution of decrees in such suits;  
(iii) The execution of decrees against immovable property; and  
(b) The following sections, that is to say, - 
sections 9,  
sections 91 and 92.  
sections 94 and 95 3[far as they authorize or relate to -' 
(i) orders for the attachment of immovable property,  
(ii) injunctions.  
(iii) the appointment of a receiver of immovable property, or  
(iv) the interl ocutory orders referred to Li clause (e) of  
section 94] and  
sections 96 to 112 and 115.  
8.-Omitted by the 4.0, 1949.  

[1908: ACT V]  
Civil Procedure  
(Part I. - Suits in General. Jurisdiction of the Courts and Res judicata)  
PART I  
SUITS IN GENERAL  
JURISDICTION  OF THL3 COURTS AND Res Judicata  
9. The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein cone tamed) have jurisdiction to try 
all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is either expressly or 
impliedly barred.  
Explanation. - A suit is which the right to property or to an office is contested is a suit of a 
civil nature, notwithstanding that such right ma depend entirely on the decision of 
questions as to religious rites or ceremonies.  
10. No Court shall proceed With the trial of any suit in which the matter in issue is also 
directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between the same parties, 
or between parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating under the same title 
where such suit is pending in th e same or any other Court in 1[Pakistan] having 
jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in any Court beyond the limits of 1[Pakistan] 
established or continued by 2[the Central Government 3***] and having like jurisdiction, 
or before 4[the Supreme Cour t]. 
Explanation. - The pendency of a suit in a foreign Court does not preclude the Courts in 
1[Pakistan] from trying a suit founded on the same cause of action.  
 
11. No Court shall try suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially in issue 
has been directly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties, or 
between parties under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, in 
a Court competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue  has been 
subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally decided by such Court.  
Explanation I. - The expression "former suit" shall denote a Suit which has been decided 
prior to the suit in question whether or not it was instituted prior thereto.  
 
 
Explanation II. - For the purposes of this section, the competence of a Court shall be 
determined irrespective of any provisions as $0 a right of appeal from the decision of 
such Court.  

Explanation III. -The matter above referred to must in the former suit have  been alleged 
by one party and either denied or admitted, expressly, or impliedly by the other.  
Explanation 1V. -Any matter which might and ought to have been made ground of 
defence or attack in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directl y and 
substantially in issue -in such suit.  
Explanation V. -Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly granted by the 
decree, shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to have been refused.  
Explanation VI. -Where persons litigate bon a fide in respect of a public right or of a 
private right claimed in common for themselves and others, all persons interested in such 
right shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to claim under the person so 
litigating.  
12. 1[(1)] Where a plain tiff is preclude by rules from instituting a further suit in respect 
of any particular cause of action, he shall not be entitled to institute a suit in respect of 
such cause of action in any Court to which this Code applies.  
1[(2) Where a person challenge s the validity of a judgment, decree or order on the pica of 
fraud, misrepresentation or want of jurisdiction, he shall seek his remedy by making an 
application to the Court which passed the final judgment, decree or order and not by a 
separate suit.]  
13. A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any matter When thereby directly 
adjudicated upon between the same parties or between parties under whom they or any of 
them claim litigating under the same title except;  
(a) Where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction;  
(b) Where LI has not been given on the merits of the case;  
(c) Where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an incorrect view of 
international law or a refusal to recognize the law of 2[Pakistan] in ca ses in which such 
law is applicable;  
(d) Where the proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural 
justice;  
(e) Where it has been obtained by fraud;  
(f) Where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in 2[Pakistan).  
 
14. The Court shall presume, upon the production of any document purporting to be a 
certified copy of a foreign judgment, that such judgment was pronounced by a Court of 
competent jurisdiction, unless the contrary appears on the record; but such presumpt ion 
may be displaced by proving want of jurisdiction.  
 
15. Every suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest grade competent to try it.  

 
16. Subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law, suits;  
(a) for the recovery of immovab le property - with or without rent or profits;  
(b) for the partition of Immovable property;  
(c) for foreclosure, sale or redemption In the case of a mortgage of or charge upon 
immovable property,  
(d) for the determination of any other right to or Interest i n immovable property;  
(e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property,  
(f) for the recovery of movable property actually under distraint or attachment;  
shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is 
situated '[, or, in the case of suits referred to in - clause (c), at, at the place where the cause 
of action his wholly or partly arisen: - 
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable 
property held by or on behalf of the defendant may, where the relief sought can be 
entirely obtained through his personal obedience, be instituted either in the Court within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate 1[or, in the case of suits 
referred to in clause (c), at the place where the cause of action has wholly or partly 
arisen) or in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually 
and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain.  
Explanation. - In this section "property" means property situate in 2[Pakistan].  
17. Where a suit is to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to immovable 
property situate within the jurisdiction of different Courts, the suit may be instituted in 
any Court withi n the local limits of whose jurisdiction any portion of the property is 
situate: - 
Provided that, in respect of the value of the subject -matter of the suit, the entire claim is 
cognizable by such Court.  
18.-(1) Where it is alleged to be uncertain within t he local limits of the jurisdiction of 
which of two or more Courts any immovable property is situate, any one of those Courts 
may, if satisfied that there is ground for the alleged uncertainty, record a statement to that 
effect and thereupon 1iroceed to en tertain and dispose of any suit relating to that 
property, and its decree in the suit shall have the same effect as if the property were 
situate within the -local limits of its jurisdiction:  
Provided that the suit is one with respect to which the Court is c ompetent as regards the 
nature and value of the suit to exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) Where a statement has not been recorded under subs section (1), and an objection is 
taken before an appellate or revisional Court that a decree or order in a suit relating t o 
such property was made by a Court not having jurisdiction where the property is situate, 
the appellate or revisional Court shall not allow the objection unless in its opinion there 

was, at the time of the institution of the suit, no reasonable ground for  uncertainty as to 
the Court having jurisdiction with respect thereto and there has been consequent failure 
of justice.  
19. Where a suit is for compensation for wrong done to the person or to movable 
property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the jurisdiction of one Court 
and the defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within the 
local limits of the jurisdiction of another Court, the suit may be instituted -at the option of 
the plaintiff in either of the said  Courts.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, residing in '[Karachi], beats B in 1[Quetta]. B may sue A either in I[Quetta or 
1[Karachi].  
(b) A, residing in [Karachi] published in [Quetta] statements defamatory of B. B may sue 
A either in [Quetta] or in [Karachi].  
20. Sub ject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be in a Court within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction.  
(a) the defendant -, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at the time of 
the commencement of the suit, actually and voluntar ily resides, or carries on business, or 
personally works for gain; or  
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the 
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or 
personally works for g ain, provided that in such case either of the Court is given, or the 
defendants who reside, or carry on business, or personally work as aforesaid, acquiesce in 
such institution; or  
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.  
Explanation I. - Where a person has - a one place and also a temporary residence shall be 
deemed to reside at both places in action arising at the place where he residence.  
Explanation II. -A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal 
office in '[Pak istan] or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has 
also a subordinate office, at such place.  
 
Illustrations  
(a) A is a tradesman in [Lahore]. B carries on business in [Karachi]. B, by his agent in 
[Lahore], buys goods of A and requests A to deliver them to the [Pakistan International 
Airways]. A delivers the goods accordingly in [Lahore]. A may sue B for the price of the 

goods either in [Lahore] where the cause of action has arisen or in [Karachi] where B 
carries on business.  
(b) A resides at [Murree], B at [Lahore], and C at [Karachi]. A, B and C being together at 
[Bahawalpur] B and C make a joint promissory note payable on demand, and deliver it to 
A. A may sue B and C at [Bhawalpur], where the cause of action arose. He may al so sue 
them at [Lahore], where B resides, or at [Karachi], where C resides: but in each of these 
cases, if the non -resident defendant objects, the suit cannot proceed without the leave of 
the Court.  
 
21. No objection as to the place of suing shall be allo wed by any appellate or revisional 
Court unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest possible 
opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement and 
unless there has been a consequent failu re of justice.  
22. Where a suit may be instituted in any one. - of two or more Courts and is instituted in 
one of such Courts, any defendant after notice to the other parties, may, at the earliest 
possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settl ed at or before such settlement, 
apply to have the suit transferred to another Court, and the Court to which such 
application is made, after considering the objections of the other parties (ii any), shall 
determine in which of the several Courts having jur isdiction be suit shall proceed.  
23. (1) Where the several Courts having jurisdiction are subordinate to the same 
Appellate Court, an application under section 22 shall be made to the Appellate Court.  
 
(2) Where such Courts are subordinate to different App ellate Courts but to the same High 
Court, the application shall be made to the said High Court.  
(3) Where such Courts arc subordinate to different High Courts, the application shall be 
made to the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction th e Court in which 
the suit is brought is situate.  
24.-..(l) On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the 
parties and after hearing such of be heard, or of its own motion without 
such notice, the High Court or the District Court may at an y stage -  
(a) transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for 
trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and competent to try or 
dispose of the same, or  
(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in any Court 
subord inate to it, and  

(i) try or dispose of the same; or  
(ii) transfer the same for trial or subordinate to it and competent same; 
or 
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the Court from which it 
was withdrawn.  
(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn 
under subsection (1) the Court which thereafter tries such suit may, 
subject to any special directions in the case of an order of transfer, 
either retry it or proceed from the point at which it was transferred or 
withdrawn.  
(3) For the purposes of' this section, and Assistant Judges shall be 
deemed to District Court.  
(4) The court trying any suit transferred or withdrawn under this 
section from a Court of Small Causes shall, for the purposes of' such 
suit, be deemed to be a Cou rt of Small Causes,  
124-A.-(1) Where any suit is transferred udder section 22, or any suit, appeal or other 
proceeding is transferred or withdrawn under subsection (1) of section 24 on the 
application of a party, the Court ordering the transfer or withdraw al shall fix a date for 
the appearance of the parties before itself, if the., suit, appeal or other proceeding is to be 
tried or disposed of by itself, or before the Court to which the case is so transferred.  
(2) Where any suit, appeal or other proceeding is transferred from one Court to another, 
otherwise than on the' application of a party, the parties thereto shall appear before the 
Court from which the suit, appeal or other proceeding is to be transferred, on the day 
already fixed for their appearance b efore that Court, and such Court shall then 
communicate the order of transfer to such parties and direct them to appear before the 
Court to which the suit, appeal or other proceeding is to be transferred, either on the same 
day, or on such earliest day as may be reasonable having regard to the distance at which 
the other Court is located.]"  
25. 1* * * * * *  
INSTITUTION OF SUITS  
 
26. Every suit shall be instituted by the presentation of a plaint or in such other manner as 
may be prescribed.  

 
SUMMONS AND DISC OVERY  
27. Where a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may defendants, be issued to the 
defendant to appear and answer the claim and may be served in manner prescribed.  
28.-(1) A summons may be sent for service in another summons. Province to such Cou rt 
and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that Province.  
(2) The Court to which summons is sent shall, upon another receipt thereof, proceed as if 
it had been issued by such Court and shall then return the summons to the Court of issu e 
together with the record (if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto.  
29. Summonses 2[and other processes] issued by any Civil or  
Revenue Court situates 1[outside] 2[Pakistan] may be sent to the Courts 3[in] 4[Pakistan] 
and served as if they 5[were s ummonses] issued by such Courts:  
6[Provided that the Courts issuing such summonses [or processes] have been established 
or continued by the authority of the Central Government or that the Provincial 
Government [of the Province in which such summonses or pr ocesses are] to be served 
has by notification in the official Gazette declared the provisions of this section to apply 
to 10[such Courts.]  
 
30. Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court may, at 
any. time, either of its own motion or on the application of any party: - 
(a) make such orders as may be necessary or reasonable in all matters relating to the 
delivery and answering of interrogatories, the admission of documents and facts, and the 
discovery, inspection, production, i mpounding and return of documents or other material 
objects producible as evidence;  
(b) issue summonses to persons whose attendance is required either to give evidence or to 
produce documents or such other objects as aforesaid;  
(c) order any fact to be pro ved by affidavit.  
31. The provisions in sections 27, 28 and 29 shall apply to summonses to give evidence 
or to produce documents or other material objects.  
32. The Court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons has been 
issued under sectio n 30 and for that purpose may - 
(a) issue a warrant for his arrest;  
(b) attach and sell his property;  

(c) impose a fine upon him not exceeding [two thousand] rupees;  
(d) order him to furnish security for his appearance and in default commit him to […..] 
prison. 
JUDGMENT AND DECREE  
33. The Court. after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment, and on such 
judgment a decree shall follow.  
INTEREST  
34.-(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the Court may, in 
the decree, order i nterest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the 
principal sum adjudged, from the date of the suit to the date of the decree, in addition to 
any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to the institution of the 
suit, with further interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable on the aggregate sum 
so adjudged, from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as 
the Court thinks fit.  
(2) Where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further interest on such 
aggregate sum as aforesaid from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other 
earlier date, the Court shall be deemed to have refused such interest, and a separate suit 
therefore shall not lie.  
3[34.A, -(l') Wher e the Court is of opinion that a suit was instituted with intent to avoid 
the payment of any public dues payable by the plaintiff or on his behalf, the Court may, 
while dismissing such suit, make an order for payment of interest on' such public dues at 
the rate, of two per cent. above the prevailing bank rate.  
 
(2) Where the Court is of opinion that the recovery of any public dues from the plaintiff 
was unjustified, the Court may, while disposing of the suit, make an order for payment of 
interest on the amo unt recovered at the rate of two per cent., about the prevailing bank 
rate. 
Explanation - In this section - 
(a) "bank rate" means the bank rate determined and made public under the provisions of 
the State Bank of Pakistan Act, 1956 (XXXIII of 1956); and  
(b) "public dues" includes the dues of any bank owned by the Federal Government or of 
any corporation or undertaking owned or controlled by the Federal Government or a 
Provincial Government or of any local authority.]  
[34.B. Where and in so far as a decree is for payment of money due to a banking 
company in repayment of a loan advanced by it, the Court shall, in the decree, provide for 

interest or return, as the case may be, on the judgment debt from the date of decree till 
payment - 
(a) In the case of interest -bearing loans, for interest at the contracted rate or at the rate of 
two percent above the bank rate, whichever is the higher;  
(b) In the case of loans given on the basis of markup in price, lease, hire -purchase or 
service charges, for the contracted rate of mark -up, rental, hire or service charges, as the 
case may be, or at the latest rate of the banking company for similar loans, whichever is 
the higher; and  
(c) in the case of loans given on the basis of participation in profit and loss, for return at 
such rate, not being less than the annual rate of profit for the preceding six months paid 
by the banking company on term deposits of six months, accepted by it on the basis of 
participation in profit and loss, as the Court may consider just and reasonable in  the 
circumstances of the case, keeping in view the profit -sharing agreement entered into 
between the banking company and the judgment -debtor when the loan was contracted.  
Explanation. -(1) In this section in clause (a), "bank rate" has the same meaning as in 
section 34 -A]. 
COSTS  
35.-(l) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the 
provisions of any law for the time being in force, the costs of an incident to all suits shall 
be in the discretion of the Court, and the Courts sha ll have full power to determine by 
whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be paid, and to give all 
necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction 
to try the suit shall be no bar to th e exercise of such powers.  
 
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall state 
its reasons in writing.  
(3) The Courts may give interest on costs at any rate not exceeding six percent per 
annum, and such interest sh all be added to the Costs and shall be recoverable as such.  
[35-A.-(l) If in any suit or other proceeding 2[including an execution proceeding)], not 
being an appeal, any party objects to the claim or defence on the ground that the claim or 
defence or any p art of it is, as against the objector, false or vexatious to the knowledge of 
the party by whom it has been put forward, and if thereafter, as against the objector, such 
claim or defence is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in part, the. Court , if 
the objection has been taken at the earliest opportunity and if it is satisfied of the justice 
thereof, may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or defence to be false or 
vexatious, make an order for the payment to the objector by the p arty by whom such 
claim or defence has been put forward, of costs by way of compensation.  

(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding 
3[twenty five thousand] rupees or exceeding the limits of its pecuniary jurisdiction, 
whichever amount is less;  
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the 
jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 
1887, and not being a Court constituted under that Act are  less than two hundred and fifty 
rupees, the High Court may empower such Court to award as costs under this section any 
amount not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not exceeding those limits by 
more than one hundred rupees:  
Provided further, that  the High Court may limit the amount which any Court or class of 
Courts is empowered to award as costs under this section.  
(3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason 
thereof, be exempted from any criminal liabilit y in respect of any claim or defence made 
by him.  
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded under this section in respect of a false or 
vexatious claim or defence shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages 
or compensation in respect of  such claim or defence.]  
--------------------  
 
PART II  
EXECUTION  
GENERAL  
36. The provisions of this Code relating to the execution of decrees shall, so far as they 
are applicable, be deemed to apply to the execution of orders.  
37. The expression "Court whi ch passed a decree" or words to that effect, shall, in 
relation to the execution of decrees unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context, be deemed to include, -  
(a) Where the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of appell ate 
jurisdiction, the first instance, and  
(b) Where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have jurisdiction to execute 
it, the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree was passed was instituted at the time of 
making the application for t he execution of the decree, would have jurisdiction to try 
such suit.  

38. A decree may be executed either by the Court which passed it, or by the Court to 
which it is sent for execution.  
39.-(l) The Court which passed a decree may, on the application of t he decree -holder, 
send it for execution to another Court;  
(a) if the person against whom the decree is passed actually and voluntarily resides or 
carries on business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction 
of such other C ourt, or  
(b) if such person has not property within the Local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court 
which passed the decree sufficient to satisfy such decree and has property within the local 
limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or  
(c) if the decree directs the sale or delivery of immovable property situate outside the 
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court which passed it; or  
(d) if the Court which passed the decree considers for any other reason, which it shall 
record in writing, that the decree should be executed by such other Court.  
(2) The Court which passed a decree may of its own motion it for execution to any 
subordinate Court of competent Transfer of decree to Court in another Province. Result 
of execution proceedings to be certi fied. 
40. Where a decree is sent for execution in another Province, it shall be sent to such 
Court and executed in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that 
Province.  
41. The Court to which a decree is sent for execution shall certify to t he Court which 
passed it the fact of such execution, or where the former Court fails to execute the same 
the circumstances attending such failure.  
42.-1[(1)] The Court executing a decree sent to it shall have the same powers in executing 
such decree as if it had been passed Court in by itself. All persons disobeying or 
obstructing the execution of the decree shall be punishable by such Court in the same 
manner ac t if it had passed the decree. And its order in executing such decree shall be 
subject to the sa me rules in respect of appeal as if the decree had been passed by itself.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Court executing a 
decree sent to it shall have the following powers, namely: - 
(a) power under section 39 to tr ansfer the decree to another Court, if necessary;  
(b) power under subsection (1) of section 50 to permit execution to proceed against the 
legal representatives of a deceased judgment -debtor;  
(c) power under section 152 to correct clerical or arithmetical e rrors;  
(d) power under rule 16 of Order XXI to recognize the assignment of a decree;  

(e) power under sub -rule (2) of rule 50 of Order XXI to grant leave to a decree -holder to 
proceed against a person not already recognized as a partner in a firm in an exec ution 
proceeding against the firm;  
(f) power under clause (b) of sub -rule (1) of rule 53 of Order XXI to give notice of 
attachment of decree passed by another Court.]  
43. Any decree passed by a civil Court established in any 2[area] in 3[Pakistan] to which  
the provisions relating to execution do not extend [……………..] may, lilt cannot he 
executed within the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, be executed in 
manner herein provided within the jurisdiction of any Court in 5[Pakistan].  
44.-[Omitted by Ordinance (27 of 1981), Second Sched., item 46(5)].  
5(44.A. -(1) Where a certified copy of a decree of any of the superior Courts of the United 
Kingdom or any reciprocating territory has been filed in a District Court, the decree may 
be executed in 3[Pak istan] as if it had been passed by the District Court.  
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a certificate from such 
superior Court stating the extent, if any, to which the decree has been satisfied or adjusted 
and such certifi cate shall, for the purposes of proceedings under this section, be 
conclusive proo1 of the extent of such satisfaction or adjustment.  
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified copy of the decree 
apply to the proceedings of a District Court executing a decree under this section, and the 
District Court shall refuse execution of any such decree, if it is shown to the satisfaction 
of the Court that the decree falls within any of the exceptions specified in clauses (a) to 
(f) of section 13.  
Explanation 1. -"Superior Court" with' reference to the United Kingdom, means the High 
Court in England, the Court of Session in Scotland, the High Court in Northern Ireland, 
the Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster and the Cour t of Chancery of 
the County Palatine of Durham.  
Explanation 2. -'4Reciprocating territory" means 1[the United Kingdom and such other 
country or territory as] the 3[Central Government) may, from time to time, by 
notification in the 3[official Gazette], decl are [to be reciprocating territory for the 
purposes of this section; and "superior Courts", with reference to any such territory, 
means such Courts as may be specified in the said notification.  
Explanation 3. -."Decree", with reference to a superior Court, means any decree or 
judgment of such Court under which a sum of money is payable, not being a sum payable 
in respect of taxes or other charges of a like nature or in respect of a fine or other penalty, 
and 
(a) With reference to superior Courts in the Unite d Kingdom, includes judgments given 
and decrees made in any Court in appeals against , such decrees or judgments, but  

(b) In no case includes an arbitration award, even if such award is enforceable as a decree 
or judgment.]  
 
45. Execution of decrees in for eign territory. -[Omitted by Ordinance (27 of 1981), 
Second Sched., item 46(5) ].  
46.-(l) Upon the application of the decree -holder the Court which passed the decree may, 
whenever it thinks fit, issue a precept to any other Court which would be competent to  
execute such decree to attach any property belonging to the judgment -debtor and 
specified in the precept.  
(2) The Court to which a precept is sent shall proceed to attach the property in the manner 
prescribed in regard to the attachment of property in exe cution of a decree:  
Provided that no attachment under a precept shall continue for more than two months 
unless the period of attachment is extended by an order of the Court which passed the 
decree or unless before the determination of such attachment the d ecree has been 
transferred to the Court by which the attachment has been made and the decree -holder 
has applied for an order for the sale of such property.  
 
QUESTIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY COURT EXECUTING DECREE  
 
47.-(l) All questions arising between the par ties to the suit in which the decree was 
passed, or their representatives, and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of 
the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree and not by a separate 
suit. 
(2) The Court may, subject to any objection as to limitation or jurisdiction, treat a 
proceeding under this section as a suit or a suit as a proceeding and may, if necessary, 
order payment of any additional court -fees. 
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is re presentative of a party, 
such question shall, for the purpose of this section, be determined by the Court.  
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed 
and a defendant against whom a suit has been dismissed, are  parties to the suit.  
 
LIMIT OF TIME FOR EXECUTION  
148....(1) Where an application to execute a decree not being a decree granting an 
injunction has been made, no order for the execution of the same decree shall be made 
upon any fresh application presented  after the expiration of [six] years from.  

(a) the date of the decree sought to be executed, or  
(b) where the decree or any subsequent order directs any payment of money or the 
delivery of any property to be made at a certain date or at recurring periods, the date of 
the default in making the payment or delivery in respect of which the applicant seeks to 
execute the decree.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed - 
(a) to preclude the Court from ordering the execution of a decree upon an application 
presented after the expiration of the said term of '[six] years, where the judgment -debtor 
has, by fraud or force, prevented the execution of the decree at some time within [six] 
years immediately before the date of the application;  
or 
(b) to limit or otherwis e affect the operation of article 2[83 of the First Schedule to the 
Limitation Act, 1908].  
 
TRANSFER FEES AND LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:  
49. Every transferee of a decree shall bold the same subject to the equities (if any) which 
the judgment -debtor might have enforced against the original decree -bolder.  
50.-(l) Where a judgment -debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied;  
the holder of the decree may apply to the Court which passed it to execute the same  
against the legal Representative of the decea sed. 
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representative, he shall be liable only 
to the extent of the property of the deceased which has come to his hands and has not 
been duty disposed of; and, for the purpose of ascertaining such liabilit y, the Court 
executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the application of the decree holder, 
compel such legal Representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit.  
PROCEDURE IN EXECUTION  
 
51.-Subject to such conditions and limitations as may b e prescribed, the Court may, on 
the application of the decree -holder order execution of the decree - 
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed;  
(b) by attachment and sale or by sale without attachment of any property ;  
(c) by arrest and detention  in prison;  
(d) by appointing a receiver; or  
(e) in such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require.  

[Provided that 2[***] execution by detention in prison shall not be ordered unless, after 
giving the judgment debtor an opportunity of s howing cause why he should not be 
committed to prison, the Court, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied: - 
(a) that the judgment -debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or delaying the 
execution of the decree, -. 
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court; or  
(ii) has, after the institution of the decree was passed, dishonestly transferred, concealed, 
or removed any part committed any other act of to his property ; or  
(b) that the judgment -debtor has, or has had date of the decree, the means to pay the 
decree or some substantial part thereof or neglects or has refused or neglected same ; or  
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment debtor was bound in a fiduciary  
capacity to account.  
Expl anation - In the calculation of the means of the judgment -debtor for the purposes of 
clause (b), there shall be left out of account any property which by or under any law or 
custom having the force of 1~w for the time being in force, is exempt from attachm ent in 
execution of the decree].  
52.-(l) Where a decree is passed against a party as the legal representative of a deceased 
person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property of the deceased, it 
may be executed by the attachment and sal e of any such property.  
(2) Where no such property remains In the possession of the judgment -debtor and he fails 
to satisfy the Court that he has duly applied such property of the deceased as is proved to 
have come into his possession, the decree may be ex ecuted against the judgment debtor 
to the extent of the property in respect of which he has failed so to satisfy the Court in the 
same manner as if they decree had been against him personally.  
53. For the purposes of section 50 and section 52, property in the hands of a son or other 
descendant which is liable under Hindu law for the payment of the debt, of a deceased 
ancestor, in respect of which a decree has been passed, shall be deemed to be property of 
the deceased which has come to the hands of the son or other descendant as his legal 
representative.  
 
A 
54. Where the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to the payment of 
revenue to '[the '[Government]) or for the separate possession of a share of such as estate, 
the partition of t he estate or the separation of the share shall be made by the Collector or 
any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance 

with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to the partition, or the separate 
possession of shares, of such estates.  
 
 
ARREST AND DETENTION  
55.--(l) A judgment -debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at any hour and on 
any day, and shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before the Court 3[which may make 
an order for his de tention in prison to suffer simple imprisonment for a period not 
exceeding one year;]  
Provided, firstly, that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwelling 
house shall be entered after sunset and before sunrise;  
Provided, secondly, t hat no outer -door of a dwelling -house shall be broken open unless 
such dwelling -house is in the occupancy of the judgment -debtor and he refuses or in any 
way present access thereto, but when the officer authorized to make the arrest has duly 
gained access to any dwelling -house, he may break open the door of any room in which 
be has reason to believe the judgment -debtor is to be found;  
Provided, thirdly, that if the room ii in the actual occupancy of a woman who is not the 
Judgement debtor and who according to the customs of the country does not appear in 
public, the officer authorized to make the arrest shall give notice to her that she is at 
liberty to withdraw, and, after allowing a reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving 
her reasonable facility for  withdrawing, may enter the room for the purpose of making 
the arrest;  
Provided fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a judgment -debtor is 
arrested, is a decree for the payment of  
and the judgment -debtor pays the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the 
officer arresting him, such officer shall at once release him;  
(2) The l[Provincial Government] may by notification in the 2[official Gazette], declare 
that any person or class of persons whose arrest might be attended with d anger or 
inconvenience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a decree otherwise 
than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the [Provincial 
Government] in this behalf.  
3[(3) A judgment -debtor detained in prison unde r sub section (1) shall not, merely by 
reason of undergoing such imprisonment, be discharged from his liability under the 
decree, but he shall not be liable to be re -arrested under the decree in execution of which 
he was so detained in prison.]  

56. Notwit hstanding anything in this Part, the Court the arrest or detention in the 4[* *] 
prison execution of a decree for the payment of money.  
57. [* * * * * * *]  
 
58. Every person detained in prison in execution of decree shall be released from such 
detention, b efore the expiry of the period of detention, if - 
(a) the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention is paid to the officer in charge 
of the prison; or  
(b) the decree against him is otherwise fully satisfied; or  
(c) the person on whose application h e has been detained so requests;  
Provided that he shall not be released from such detention without the order of the Court.]  
 
59. [* * * * * * * *]  
 
60. (1) The following property is liable to attachment and sale in execution of a decree, 
namely, lands hou ses or other buildings, goods, money, bank -notes, cheques, bills of 
exchange, hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities for 
money, debts, shares in a corporation and, save as hereinafter mentioned, all 4other 
saleable prope rty, movable or immovable, belonging to the judgment -debtor, or over 
which or the profits of which. be has a disposing power which he may exercise for his 
own benefit, whether the same be held in the name of the judgment -debtor or by another 
person in trus t of him or on his behalf:  
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, 
namely: - 
 
(a) the necessary wearing -apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedding of the judgment -
debtor, his wife and children, and such person al ornaments as. in accordance with 
religious usage, cannot be parted with any woman;  
(b) tools of artisans arid, where the judgment -debtor is art agriculturist, his implements of 
husbandry and such cattle and seed -grain as may, in the opinion of the Court , be 
necessary to enable him to earn his livelihood as such, and such portion of agricultural 
produce, or of any class of agricultural produce as may have been declared to be free 
from liability under the provisions of the next following section;  
 
(c) hous es and other buildings (with the materials ahd the sizes thereof and the land 

immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to an 
agriculturist and cccupied by him;  
(d) books of accounts;  
(e) a mere right to sue for damages ;  
(f) any right of personal service ;  
(g) stipends and gratuities allowed to 2[pensioners of the 3[Government], or payable out 
of any service family and the costs of the arrest to the officer arresting him, such office 
shall at once release him.  
(h) the wa ges of labourers and domestic servants, whether payable in money or  
in kind;  
(l) Salary to the extent of the first hundred rupees and one half the remainder;  
Provided that where such salary is the salary of a 6[servant of the State] or a servant of a 
railway 7* * * or local authority and the whole or any part of the portion of such salary 
liable to attachment has been under attachment, whether continuously or intermittently 
for a total period of twenty -four months, such portion shall be exempt from attach ment 
until the expiry of a further period of twelve months and, where such attachment has been 
made in execution of one and the same decree, shall be finally exempt from attachment in 
execution of that decree ;]  
(j) the pay and allowances of persons to who m the 8[Pakistan Army Act, 1952],  
9* * *applies]. [or of persons other than commissioned officers to whom the 1[Pakistan 
Navy Ordinance, 1961 (XXXV of 1961) applies];  
(k) all compulsory deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the  
Provident Funds Act [1925], for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by 
the said Act not to be liable to attachment;  
(l) any allowance forming part of the emoluments of any [servant of the State] or of any 
servant of a railway 4 * * * or loc al authority which the [appropriate Government] may 
by notification in the [official Gazette] declare to be exempt from attachment, and any 
subsistence grant or allowance made to 7[any such servant] while under suspension; (in) 
an expectancy of succession by survivorship or other, merely contingent or possible right 
or interest;  
(n) A right to future maintenance;  
 
(o) Any allowance declared by [any Pakistan law] to be exempt from liability to  
attachment or sale in execution of a decree; and  

(p) Where the j udgment debtor is a person liable for the pays merit of land revenue,  
any movable property which, under any law for the time being applicable to him,  
is exempt from sale for the recovery of an arrear of such revenue.  
 
[Explanation 1] The particulars ment ioned in clauses (g), (h), (i), (j), (l) and (o) are 
exempt from attachment or sale whether before or after they are actually payable, [and in 
the case of salary other than salary of a [servant of the State] or a servant of a railway 1 
*** or local authori ty the attachable portion thereof is exempt from attachment until it is 
actually payable].  
2[Explanation 2. -In clauses (h) and (1), "salary" means the total monthly emoluments, 
excluding any allowance declared exempt from attachment under the provisions o f clause 
(1), derived by a person from his employment whether on duty or on leave.]  
3[Explanation 3 -.40 clause (I) "appropriate Government" means - 
 
(i) As respects any 4[person] in the service of the Government, or any servant [of railway 
or] cantonment a uthority or the port authority of a port, the Central Government:  
(iii) As respects any other 7[servant of the State] or a servant of any local authority, the 
Provincial Government].  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed -. 
to exempt houses and other  buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the 
lands immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) from 
attachment or sale in execution of decrees for rent of any such house, building, site or 
land,  
61. The [Provincial Go vernment] * * may. by general or special order published in the 
2fofficial Gazette], declare that such portion of agricultural produce, or of any class of 
agriculture produce, as may appear to the 10[Provincial Government] to be for the 
purpose of providin g until the next harvest for the due cultivation of the land and for the 
support judgment -debtor and his family, shall, in the case of all turists or of any class of 
agriculturist be exempted from to attachment or sale in execution of a decree.  
62. (1) No  person executing any process under this directing or authorizing seizure  
of movable property shall any dw1diling.house after sunset and before sunrise.  
(2) No outer -door of a dwelling -house shall be broken open unl~ss such dwelling -house 
is in the occupa ncy of the judgment. debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access 
thereto, but when the person executing any such process has duly gained access to any 
dwelling -house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has reason to 
believe any such  property to be.  

(3) Where a room in a dwelling -house is in the actual occuo pancy of a woman who, 
according to the customs of the country does not appear in public, the person executing 
the process shall give notice to such woman that she is at liberty to  withdraw ; and, after 
allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for 
withdrawing, he may enter such room for the purpose, of seizing the property, using at 
the same time every precaution, consistent with these provisio ns, to prevent its 
clandestine removal.  
 
63.-41) Where property not in the custody of any Court is under attachment in execution 
of decrees of more Courts than one, the Court which shall receive or realize such property 
and shall determine any claim there to and any objection to the attachment thereof shall be 
the Court of highest grade, or, where there is no difference in grade between such Courts, 
the Court under whose decree the property was first attached.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any proceeding taken by a Court 
executing one of such decrees.  
64. Where an attachment has been made, any private transfer or delivery of the property 
attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the judgment -debtor of any debt, 
divide nd or other monies contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims 
enforceable under the attachment.  
 
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, claims enforce under an attachment include 
claims for the rateable distribution of assets.   
65. Where immovable property is sold in execution of a decree and such sale has become 
absolute, the property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time 
when the property is sold and not from the time when the sale becomes absolute.  
 
66. (l) No suit shall be maintained against any person claiming title under a purchase 
certified by the Court in such manner as may be prescribed on the ground that the 
purchase was made on behalf of the plaintiff or on behalf of some one through whom the 
plaintiff claims.  
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall bar a suit to obtain a declaration that the name of any 
purchaser certified as aforesaid was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or without the 
consent of the real purchaser, or interfere with the ri ght of a third person to proceed 
against that property, though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser, on the ground that 
it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third person against the real owner,  
67.--{l) The 2[Provincial Government] may by notifica tion in the 4fothcial Gazette], 
make rules for any local area imposing conditions in respect of the sale of any class of 

interest in land in executing of decrees for the payment of money, where such interests 
are so uncertain or undetermined as in the opin ion of the 2[Provincial Government], to 
make it impossible to fix their value.  
 
[(2) When on the date on which this Code came into operation in any local area, any 
special rules as to sale of land in execution of decrees were in force therein, the 
2[Provin cial Government] may, by notification in the 4[official Gazette] declare such 
rules to be in force, or may, by a like notification, modify the same.  
Every notification issued in the exercise of the powers conferred by this subsection shall 
set out the rule s so continued or modified]  
 
DELEGATION TO COLLECTOR OF POWER TO EXECUTE DECREES  
AGAINST IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
68. The 2[Provincial Government] may declare by notification in the 4[official Gazette] 
that in any local area the execution of decrees in cases i n which a Court has ordered any 
immovable property to be sold, or the execution of any particular kind of such decrees, or 
the execution of decrees ordering the sale of any particular kind of, or interest in 
immovable property, shall be transferred to the Collector.  
69. The provisions set forth in the Third Schedule shall apply to all cases in which the 
execution of a decree has been transferred under the last preceding section.  
70. (l) The 2[Provincial Government] may make rules consistent with the aforesa id 
provisions - 
(a) for the transmission of the decree from the Court to the Collector, and for regulating 
the procedure of the Collector and his subordinates in executing the same, and for re -
transmitting the decree from the Collector to the Court;  
(d) By  appointing a receiver; or  
(e) In such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require.  
[Provided that 2[***] execution by detention in prison shall not be ordered unless, after 
giving the judgment debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he  should not be 
committed to prison, the Court, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied: - 
(a) that the judgment -debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or delaying the 
execution of the decree, -. 
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local lim its of the jurisdiction of the Court; or  

(ii) has, after the institution of the decree was passed, dishonestly transferred, concealed, 
or removed any part committed any other act of to his property ; or  
(b) that the judgment -debtor has, or has had date of the decree, the means to pay the 
decree or some substantial part thereof or neglects or has refused or neglected same ; or  
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment debtor was bound in a fiduciary  
capacity to account.  
Explanation - In the ca lculation of the means of the judgment -debtor for the purposes of 
clause (b), there shall be left out of account any property which by or under any law or 
custom having the force of 1~w for the time being in force, is exempt from attachment in 
execution of  the decree].  
52.-(l) Where a decree is passed against a party as the legal representative of a deceased 
person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property of the deceased, it 
may be executed by the attachment and sale of any such prope rty. 
(2) Where no such property remains In the possession of the judgment -debtor and he fails 
to satisfy the Court that he has duly applied such property of the deceased as is proved to 
have come into his possession, the decree may be executed against the judgment debtor 
to the extent of the property in respect of which he has failed so to satisfy the Court in the 
same manner as if they decree had been against him personally.  
53. For the purposes of section 50 and section 52, property in the hands of a son or other 
descendant which is liable under Hindu law for the payment of the debt, of a deceased 
ancestor, in respect of which a decree has been passed, shall be deemed to be property of 
the deceased which has come to the hands of the son or other descendant  as his legal 
representative.  
 
A 
54. Where the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to the payment of 
revenue to '[the '[Government]) or for the separate possession of a share of such as estate, 
the partition of the estate or the se paration of the share shall be made by the Collector or 
any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance 
with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to the partition, or the separate 
possession of shares , of such estates.  
 
 
ARREST AND DETENTION  
55.--(l) A judgment -debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at any hour and on 
any day, and shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before the Court 3[which may make 

an order for his detention in prison t o suffer simple imprisonment for a period not 
exceeding one year;]  
Provided, firstly, that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwelling 
house shall be entered after sunset and before sunrise;  
Provided, secondly, that no outer -door o f a dwelling -house shall be broken open unless 
such dwelling -house is in the occupancy of the judgment -debtor and he refuses or in any 
way present access thereto, but when the officer authorized to make the arrest has duly 
gained access to any dwelling -house, he may break open the door of any room in which 
be has reason to believe the judgment -debtor is to be found;  
Provided, thirdly, that if the room ii in the actual occupancy of a woman who is not the 
Judgement debtor and who according to the customs of t he country does not appear in 
public, the officer authorized to make the arrest shall give notice to her that she is at 
liberty to withdraw, and, after allowing a reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving 
her reasonable facility for withdrawing, may e nter the room for the purpose of making 
the arrest;  
Provided fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a judgment -debtor is 
arrested, is a decree for the payment of money and the judgment -debtor pays the amount 
of the decree and the costs of t he arrest to the officer arresting him, such officer shall at 
once release him;  
(2) The l[Provincial Government] may by notification in the 2[official Gazette], declare 
that any person or class of persons whose arrest might be attended with danger or 
incon venience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a decree otherwise 
than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the [Provincial 
Government] in this behalf.  
3[(3) A judgment -debtor detained in prison under sub section (1) shall not, merely by 
reason of undergoing such imprisonment, be discharged from his liability under the 
decree, but he shall not be liable to be re -arrested under the decree in execution of which 
he was so detained in prison.]  
61. Notwithstanding anyt hing in this Part, the Court the arrest or detention in the 4[* *] 
prison execution of a decree for the payment of money.  
62. [* * * * * * *]  
63. Every person detained in prison in execution of decree shall be released from such 
detention, before the expir y of the period of detention, if - 
(a) the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention is paid to the officer in charge 
of the prison; or  

(b) the decree against him is otherwise fully satisfied; or  
(c) the person on whose application he has been deta ined so requests;  
Provided that he shall not be released from such detention without the order of the Court.]  
 
64. [* * * * * * * *]  
 
65. (1) The following property is liable to attachment and sale in execution of a decree, 
namely, lands houses or other bu ildings, goods, money, bank -notes, cheques, bills  
of exchange, hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities 
for money, debts, shares in a corporation and, save as hereinafter mentioned, all 4other 
saleable property, movable o r immovable, belonging to the judgment -debtor, or over 
which or the profits of which. be has a disposing power which he may exercise for his 
own benefit, whether the same be held in the name of the judgment -debtor or by another 
person in trust of him or on  his behalf:  
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, 
namely: - 
 
(a) the necessary wearing -apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedding of the judgment -
debtor, his wife and children, and such personal ornaments a s. in accordance with 
religious usage, cannot be parted with any woman;  
(b) tools of artisans arid, where the judgment -debtor is art agriculturist, his implements of 
husbandry and such cattle and seed -grain as may, in the opinion of the Court, be 
necessary  to enable him to earn his livelihood as such, and such portion of agricultural 
produce, or of any class of agricultural produce as may have been declared to be free 
from liability under the provisions of the next following section;  
 
(c) houses and other b uildings (with the materials ahd the sizes thereof and the land 
immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to an 
agriculturist and cccupied by him;  
(d) books of accounts;  
 
(e) a mere right to sue for damages ;  
(f) any righ t of personal service ;  

(g) stipends and gratuities allowed to 2[pensioners of the 3[Government], or payable out 
of any service family and the costs of the arrest to the officer arresting him, such office 
shall at once release him.  
(i) the wages of labour ers and domestic servants, whether payable in money or  
in kind;  
(l) Salary to the extent of the first hundred rupees and one half the remainder;  
Provided that where such salary is the salary of a 6[servant of the State] or a servant of a 
railway 7* * * o r local authority and the whole or any part of the portion of such salary 
liable to attachment has been under attachment, whether continuously or intermittently 
for a total period of twenty -four months, such portion shall be exempt from attachment 
until th e expiry of a further period of twelve months and, where such attachment has been 
made in execution of one and the same decree, shall be finally exempt from attachment in 
execution of that decree ;]  
(k) the pay and allowances of persons to whom the 8[Pakis tan Army Act, 1952],  
9* * *applies]. [or of persons other than commissioned officers to whom the 1[Pakistan 
Navy Ordinance, 1961 (XXXV of 1961) applies];  
(k) all compulsory deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the  
Provident Funds Act [1925], for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by 
the said Act not to be liable to attachment;  
(l) any allowance forming part of the emoluments of any [servant of the State] or of any 
servant of a railway 4 * * * or local authority which the [appropriate Government] may 
by notification in the [official Gazette] declare to be exempt from attachment, and any 
subsistence grant or allowance made to 7[any such servant] while under suspension; (in) 
an expectancy of succession by survivorsh ip or other, merely contingent or possible right 
or interest;  
(n) A right to future maintenance;  
 
(o) Any allowance declared by [any Pakistan law] to be exempt from liability to  
attachment or sale in execution of a decree; and  
(p) Where the judgment debto r is a person liable for the pays merit of land revenue,  
any movable property which, under any law for the time being applicable to him,  
is exempt from sale for the recovery of an arrear of such revenue.  
 
[Explanation 1] The particulars mentioned in clau ses (g), (h), (i), (j), (l) and (o) are 
exempt from attachment or sale whether before or after they are actually payable, [and in 
the case of salary other than salary of a [servant of the State] or a servant of a railway 1 

*** or local authority the attach able portion thereof is exempt from attachment until it is 
actually payable].  
2[Explanation 2. -In clauses (h) and (1), "salary" means the total monthly emoluments, 
excluding any allowance declared exempt from attachment under the provisions of clause 
(1), derived by a person from his employment whether on duty or on leave.]  
3[Explanation 3 -.40 clause (I) "appropriate Government" means - 
 
(i) As respects any 4[person] in the service of the Government, or any servant [of railway 
or] cantonment authority or t he port authority of a port, the Central Government:  
(iii) As respects any other 7[servant of the State] or a servant of any local authority, the 
Provincial Government].  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed -. 
to exempt houses and other buildings (w ith the materials and the sites thereof and the 
lands immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) from 
attachment or sale in execution of decrees for rent of any such house, building, site or 
land,  
61. The [Provincial Government] * *  may. by general or special order published in the 
2fofficial Gazette], declare that such portion of agricultural produce, or of any class of 
agriculture produce, as may appear to the 10[Provincial Government] to be for the 
purpose of providing until the n ext harvest for the due cultivation of the land and for the 
support judgment -debtor and his family, shall, in the case of all turists or of any class of 
agriculturist be exempted from to attachment or sale in execution of a decree.  
62. (1) No person execu ting any process under this directing or authorizing seizure  
of movable property shall any dw1diling.house after sunset and before sunrise.  
(2) No outer -door of a dwelling -house shall be broken open unless such dwelling -house 
is in the occupancy of the ju dgment. debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access 
thereto, but when the person executing any such process has duly gained access to any 
dwelling -house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has reason to 
believe any such property to be. 
(3) Where a room in a dwelling -house is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, 
according to the customs of the country does not appear in public, the person executing 
the process shall give notice to such woman that she is at liberty to withdraw ; and , after 
allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for 
withdrawing, he may enter such room for the purpose, of seizing the property, using at 
the same time every precaution, consistent with these provisions, to prevent its 
clandestine removal.  
63.-41) Where property not in the custody of any Court is under attachment in execution 

of decrees of more Courts than one, the Court which shall receive or realize such property 
and shall determine any claim thereto and any objec tion to the attachment thereof shall be 
the Court of highest grade, or, where there is no difference in grade between such Courts, 
the Court under whose decree the property was first attached.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any p roceeding taken by a Court 
executing one of such decrees.  
64. Where an attachment has been made, any private transfer or delivery of the property 
attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the judgment -debtor of any debt, 
dividend or other moni es contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims 
enforceable under the attachment.  
 
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, claims enforce under an attachment include 
claims for the rateable distribution of assets.  
65. Where immo vable property is sold in execution of a decree and such sale has become 
absolute, the property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time 
when the property is sold and not from the time when the sale becomes absolute.  
 
66. (l) No suit s hall be maintained against any person claiming title under a purchase 
certified by the Court in such manner as may be prescribed on the ground that the 
purchase was made on behalf of the plaintiff or on behalf of some one through whom the 
plaintiff claims.  
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall bar a suit to obtain a declaration that the name of any 
purchaser certified as aforesaid was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or without the 
consent of the real purchaser, or interfere with the right of a third p erson to proceed 
against that property, though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser, on the ground that 
it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third person against the real owner,  
67.--{l) The 2[Provincial Government] may by notification in the 4fot hcial Gazette], 
make rules for any local area imposing conditions in respect of the sale of any class of 
interest in land in executing of decrees for the payment of money, where such interests 
are so uncertain or undetermined as in the opinion of the 2[Pro vincial Government], to 
make it impossible to fix their value.  
 
[(2) When on the date on which this Code came into operation in any local area, any 
special rules as to sale of land in execution of decrees were in force therein, the 
2[Provincial Government]  may, by notification in the 4[official Gazette] declare such 
rules to be in force, or may, by a like notification, modify the same.  

Every notification issued in the exercise of the powers conferred by this subsection shall 
set out the rules so continued o r modified]  
 
DELEGATION TO COLLECTOR OF POWER TO EXECUTE DECREES  
AGAINST IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
71. The 2[Provincial Government] may declare by notification in the 4[official Gazette] 
that in any local area the execution of decrees in cases in which a Court has ordered any 
immovable property to be sold, or the execution of any particular kind of such decrees, or 
the execution of decrees ordering the sale of any particular kind of, or interest in 
immovable property, shall be transferred to the Collector.  
(3) N othing in this section affects any right of [the 2[Government].  
RESISTANCE TO EXECUTION  
 
[74.-(l) Where the Court is satisfied that the holder of a decree for the possession of 
property or a purchaser of property sold in execution of a decree has been resi sted or 
obstructed in obtaining possession of the property by the judgment -debtor or any other 
person on his behalf and that such resistance or obstruction was without any just cause, 
the Court may, at the instance of the decree holder or the purchaser, or der the judgment -
debtor or such other person to undergo simple imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to thirty days and may further direct that the decree -holder or the purchaser be put into 
possession of the property.  
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in subsection (1), where a judgment -debtor or 
my other person resists or obstructs the execution of a decree, the Court may direct the 
officer in charge of the police -station within whose jurisdiction the judgment -debtor or 
such other person resides or where the property to which the decree relates is situate to 
provide, the necessary police assistance for the execution of the decree.]  
INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
COMMISSIONS  
75.Subjóctto such conditions .and limitations as may. be prescribed the Court may issue a 
commission -.. 
(a)to examine any person ;  
(b)to make a local investigation;  
(c)to examine or adjust accounts; or  
(d)to make a partition.  

 
76. (1) A commission for the examination of any person Commiss1on~ may be issued to 
any Court (not being a Hig h Court) situate in a Province other than Province in which the 
Court of issue is situate and having jurisdiction in the place in which the person to be 
examined resides.  
(2)Every Court receiving a commission for the examination of any person under 
subsec tion (1) shall examine him or cause him to be examined pursuant thereto, and the 
commission, when it has been duly executed, shall be returned together with the evidence 
taken under it to the Court from which it was issued, unless the order for issuing the  
commission has otherwise directed in which case the commission shall be returned in 
terms of such order.  
77. In lieu of issuing a commission the Court may issue a Letter of~ letter of request to 
examine a witness residing at any place not request within [ Pakistan].  
 
78.2[Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed], the provisions as 
to the execution and return of come by foreign missions for the examination of witnesses 
shall apply to commission issued by [or at the instance of]  
(a)Cou rts situate beyond the limits of 2[Pakistan and established] or continued by the 
authority of 3* * * 4[the  
Central Government5 * * *], or  
(b) * * *  
[(c) Courts of any State or country outside Pakistan.]  
PART IV  
SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST  [THE GOVERNEMNT] OR PUBLIC OFFICERS  
IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY  
79. * * * In a suit by or against the 2Government) the authority to be named as plaintiff 
or defendants as the case may be, shall be - 
(a) in the case of a suit by or against the Central Govern ment, Pakistan];  
(b) in the case of a suit by or against a Provincial Government, the Province; and  
 
80.-(l) A suit may be instituted against the Government or against a public officer, In 
respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity, 

after the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered to or left 
at the office of - 
(a) in the case of a suit against the Central Government, a Secretary to that Government;  
(b) (I) In the case of a suit a gainst the Provincial Government other than a suit relating to 
the affairs of a Railway, a Secretary to that Government or the. Collector of the District; 
and 
(ii) In the case of a suit against the 8[Federal Government] relating to the affairs of a 
Railway , the General Manager of the Railway concerned, and in the case of a public 
officer, delivered to him or left at his office stating the cause of' action, the name, 
description of place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims ; and the 
plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.  
(2) Where any such suit is instituted without delivering or leaving such notice as 
aforesaid or before the expiration of the said period of two months or where the plaint 
does not contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left, the plaintiff 
shill not be entitled to any costs if settlement as regards the subject -matter of the suit is 
reached or the Government or the public officer concedes the plaintiff's cl aim, within the 
period of two months from the date of the institution of the suit:  
Provided that in a suit instituted without such notice, the Court shall allow not less than 
three months to the Government to submit its written statement.]  
81.In a suit ins tituted against a public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done 
by him in his official capacity -  
(a) the defendant shall not be liable to arrest nor his property to attachment, otherwise 
than in execution  
of a decree, and  
(b) where the Court is satisfied that the defendant cannot absent himself from his duty 
without determent to the public service, it shall exempt him from appearing in person.  
 
82.-(l) Where the decree is against '[the 2[Government]] or Execution against a public 
officer in re spect of any such act as aforesaid, a of decree time shall be specified in the 
decree within which it shall be satisfied ; and if the decree is not satisfied within the time 
so specified, the Court shall report the case for 'the orders of the 3(Provincial 
Government].  
(2) Execution shall not be issued on any such decree unless it remains ununsatisfied for 
the period of three months computed from the date of such report.  

SUITS BY ALIENS AND BY OR AGAINST FO1.ETGN RULES,  
AMBASSADORS AND ENVOYS  
83.-(1) Alien e nemies residing [in Pakistan] with the permission of the [Central 
Government], an alien friends, may sue in the Courts [in the Provinces], as if they were 
[Citizens of Pakistan].  
(2) No alien enemy residing [in Pakistan] without such permission, or residin g in a 
foreign country, shall sue in any of such Courts.  
Explanation. -Every person residing in a foreign country the Government of which is at 
war with 2[or engaged in military operations against] 3[Pakistan], and carrying on 
business in that country with out a [license in that behalf under the hand 4* * * of a 
Secretary to the 5[Central Government] shall, for the purpose of subsection (2), be 
deemed to be an alien enemy residing in a foreign country.  
84.-(1) A foreign State may sue in any Court [in the Pro vince]:  
Provided that such State has been recognized by the [Central Government]:  
Provided, also, that the object of the suit is to enforce a private right vested in the head of 
such State or in any officer of such State iii his public capacity.  
(2) Every  Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that a foreign State has or has not 
been recognized by the Central Government].  
85.(1) Persons specially appointed by order of the Central Government at the request of 
the Ruler of any foreign State, or at the request of any person competent, in the opinion 
of the Central Government to act on behalf of such Ruler, to prosecute or defend any suit 
on his behalf, shall be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom appearances acts and 
applications under this Code m ay be made or done on behalf of such Ruler.]  
(2) An appointment under this section may be made for the purpose of a specified suit or 
of several specified suits, or for the purpose of all such suits as it may from time to time 
be necessary to prosecute or defend on behalf of the [Ruler].  
 
(3) A person appointed under this section may authorize or appoint persons to make 
appearances and applications and do acts in any such suit or suits as if he were himself a 
party thereto.  
 
86. (1) Any [Ruler of a foreign State] may, [……. With the consent of the Central 
Government, certified by the signature of a Secretary to that Government] but not without 
such consent, be sued in any competent Court.  

(2)Such consent may be given with respect to a specified suit or to sev eral specified suits 
or with respect to all suits of any specified class or classes, and may specify, in the case 
of any suit or class of suits, the Court in which the 5[Ruler] may be send; but it shall not 
be given unless it appears to [the consenting aut hority] that the [Ruler];  
(a) has instituted a suit in the Court against the person desiring to sue him, or  
(b) by himself or another trades within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or  
(c) is in possession of immovable property situated wi thin those limits and Is to be sued 
with reference to such property or for money charged thereon.  
(3) No such [Ruler] shall be arrested under this Code, and, except with [the consent of the 
Central Government] certified as aforesaid, no decree shall be exe cuted against the 
property of any such [Ruler.]  
(4) The Central Government9. ..may by notification in the [official Gazette] authorize a 
Provincial Government and any Secretary to that Government to exercise with respect to 
any [Ruler] named in the notific ation the functions assigned by the foregoing subsections 
to the consenting authority and a certifying officer respectively.  
(5) A person may as a tenant of immovable property, sue, without such consent as is 
mentioned in this section, a '[Ruler) from whom  he holds or claims to hold the property.  
186-A. (1) No proceeding in any Court shall lie against a diplomatic agent except in a 
case relating to - 
 
(a) any private immovable property situated in Pakistan held by him in his private 
capacity and not on behal f of the sending State for the purpose of the mission;  
 
(b) a succession in which the diplomatic agent is Involved as executor, administrator, heir 
or legates as a private person and not on behalf of the sending State;  
(c) any professional or commercial ac tivity exercised by the diplomatic agent in Pakistan 
outside his official functions.  
(2) No measures of execution shall be taken in respect of a diplomatic agent except in 
cases which Come under clauses (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (1) and in which such 
measures can be taken without infringing the inviolability of his person or of his 
residence.  
(3) The initiation of any proceedings in a Court by a diplomatic agent shall, preclude him 
from invoking immunity from jurisdiction under this section in respect of any counter -
claim directly connected with the principal claim.  

(4) The immunity of a diplomatic agent under subsection (1) or subsection (2) may be 
waived by~ the sending State; and any such waiver shall be express.  
(5) Waiver of immunity in respect of any proceedings shall not be held to imply waiver 
of immunity in respect of any measure of execution for which a separate waiver still be 
necessary.  
(6) in this section, 'diplomatic agent' in relation to a State means the head of the mission 
in Pakistan of  that State and includes a member of the staff of that mission having 
diplomatic rank.  
87.[the Ruler of a foreign State] may sue, and shall be sued in the name of his State:  
Provided that in giving the consent referred to in the foregoing section [the Cen tral 
Government, 3*** or the Provincial Government, as the case be, may direct the any such 
[Ruler] shall be sued in the name of an agent or in any other name.  
87-A. Suits against Rulers of acceding and merged states.]  
INTERPLEADER  
88. Where two or more p ersons claim adversely to one another the same debt, sum of 
money or other property movable or immovable, from another person, who claims no 
interest therein other than or charges or costs and who is ready to pay or deliver it to the 
rightful claimant, suc h other person may institute a suit of' interpleader against all the 
claimants for the purpose of obtaining a decision as to the person to whom the payment 
or delivery shall be made and of obtaining indemnity for himself:  
 
Provided that where any suit ii p ending in which the rights of all parties can properly be 
decided, no such suit of interpleader shall be instituted,  
PART V  
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS  
ARBITRATION  
89. [Arbitration] Omitted by the Arbitration Act, 1940 (X of 1940), S. 49 and Third 
Schedule.  
SPECI AL CASE  
90. Where any persons agree in writing to state a case for the opinion of the Court, then 
the Court shall try and determine the same in the manner prescribed.  
SUITS RELATING TO PUBLIC MATTERS  

91.(1)In the case of a public nuisance the Advocate -General, or two or more persons 
having obtained the consent in writing of the Advocate -General, may institute a suit, 
though no special damage has been caused, for a declaration and injunction or for such 
other relief as may be appropriate to the circumstanc es of the case.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any right of suit 
which may exist independently of its provisions.  
92.-(l) in the case of any alleged breach of any express or constructive trust created for 
public p urposes of a charitable or religious nature, or where the direction of the Court is 
deemed necessary for the administration of any such trust, the Advocate. General, or two 
or more persons having an interest in the trust and having obtained the consent in writing 
of the Advocate General, may institute a suit, whether contentious or not, in the principal 
Civil Court of original jurisdiction or in any other Court empowered in that behalf by the 
[Provincial Government] within the local limits of whose jurisdic tion the whole or any 
part of the subject matter of the trust is situate, to obtain a decree - 
 
(a) removing any trustee,  
(b) appointing a flew trustee ;  
(c) vesting any property in a trustee ;  
(d) directing accounts and inquiries ;  
(e) declaring what propo rtion of the trust -property or of  
the interest therein shall be allocated to any particular  
object of the trust ;  
(f) authorizing the whole or any part of the trust -property to be let sold, mortgaged or 
exchanged ;  
(g) settling a scheme ; or  
(h) granting s uch further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.  
(2) Save as provided by the Religious Endowments Act, 1863. no suit claiming any of the 
reliefs specified in subsection (1) shall be instituted in respect of any such trust as is 
therein r eferred to except in conformity with the provisions of that subsections,  
93.The powers conferred by sections 91 and 92 on the Advocate -General may, 1***, be 
with the previous sanction of the 2[Provincial Government], exercised also by the 
Collector or by s uch officer as the 2[Provincial Government] may appoint in this behalf.  
PART VI  
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS  
94.In order to prevent the ends of justice from being defeated the Court may, if it is so 
prescribed, - 

(a)issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause 
why he should not give security for his appearance, and if' he fails to comply with any 
order for security commit him to the civil prison;  
(b)direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property belongi ng to him and 
to place the same at the disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property;  
(c)grant a temporary injunction and in case of disobedience commit the person guilty 
thereof to the civil prison and order that his property be attached a nd sold;  
(c)appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his duties by 
attaching and selling his property;  
 
95.-(1) Where, in any suit in which an arrest or attachment has been effected or a 
temporary injunction granted under the last  preceding section.  
 
(a) it appears to the Court that such arrest, attachment or injunction was applied for on 
insufficient grounds, or;  
(b) the suit of the Plaintiff fails and it appears to the Court that there was no reasonable or 
probably ground  
for instituting the same;  
the defendant may apply to the Court, and the Court may, upon such application, award 
against the plaintiff by its order such amount, not exceeding [ten thousand] rupees, as it 
deems a reasonable compensation to the defendant for the expense of injury caused to 
him: 
Provided that a Court shall not award, under this section, an amount exceeding the limits 
of its pecuniary jurisdiction.  
(2) An order determining any such application shall bar any suit for compensation in 
respect of such a rrest, attachment or Injunction.  
 
PART VII  
APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES  
96.--(l) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any other 
law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie from every decree passed by any Court 
exercising original jurisdiction to the Court authorized to hear appeals from the decisions 
of such Court.  
(2)An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex -parte.  

(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court With the consent of panics.  
 
97. Where any party aggrieved by a preliminary decree passed after the commencement 
of this Code does not appeal from such decree, he shall be precluded from disputing its 
correctness in any appeal which may be preferred from the final decree.  
98.(l) Where a n more Judges, the appeal opinion of such Judges.  
(2)Where there is no such judgment varying or reversing the decree shall be confirmed:  
Provided that where the Bench hearing the appeal is composed of two Judges belonging 
to a Court consisting of more tha n two Judges, and the Judges composing the Bench 
differ in opinion on a point of law, they may state the point of law upon which they differ 
and the appeal shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other 
Judges, and such point shall be  decided according to the opinion of the majority (if any) 
of the Judges who have heard the appeal, including those who first heard it.  
1[(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or otherwise affect any provision of 
the letters patent any High  Court.].  
99. No decree shall be reversed or substantially varied, nor shall any case be remanded, in 
appeal on account of any misjoinder of parties or causes of - action or any error, defect or 
irregularity in any proceedings in the suit, not affecting t he merits of the case or the 
jurisdiction of the Court  
 
APPEALS FROM APPEALATE DECABRIS  
100.-(l) Save where otherwise expressly provided - in the body of this Code or by any 
ocher law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the High Court from  every 
decree passed in appeal by any Court subordinate to a High Court on any of the following 
grounds, namely:  
(a) the decision being contrary to law or to some usage having the force of law.  
(b) the decision having failed to determine some material issu e of law or usage having the 
force of law  
(c) a substantial error or defect in the procedure provided by this Code or by any other 
law for the time  
being in force, which may possibly have produced error or defect in the decision of the 
case upon the  
merits. 
2[(2) * * * *  
101. No second appeal shall lie except on the grounds mentioned in section 100.  

3[102. No second appeal shall lie, - 
(a) in any suit of the nature cognizable by Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or 
value of the subject -matter of the  original suit does not exceed [twenty -five thousand] 
rupees; and  
(b) in any other suit, when the amount or value subject matter of the original suit does not 
exceed 4[two hundred fifty thousand] rupees.  
 
103. In any second appeal the High Court may, if th e evidence on the record is sufficient 
determine any issue of fact necessary for the disposal of the appeal 5[which has not been 
determined by the lower appellate Court or which has been wrongly determined by such 
Court by reason -of any illegality, omissi on, error or defect such as is referred to in 
subsection (1) of section 100].  
APPEALS PROM ORDERS  
104.-(1) An appeal. shall lie from the following orders, and save as otherwise express1y 
provided In the body of this Code or by any law for the time being i n force, from no other 
orders: - 
2[f) an order under section 35 -A; 
(ff) an order under section 47;]  
(g) an order under section 95;  
(h) an order under any of the provisions of this Code imposing a fine or directing the 
arrest or detention in the civil priso n of any person except where such arrest or detention 
is in execution of a decree;  
(i) any order made under rules from which an appeal is express1y allowed by rules:  
3[Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order specified in clause (f) 4save on the  
ground that no order, or an order for the payment of a Jess amount, ought to have been 
made].  
(2) No appeal shall lie from any order passed in appeal under this section.  
105.-(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, no appeal shall lie from any order mad e 
by a Court in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction; but where a decree is 
appeared from, any error, defect or irregularity in any order, affecting the decision of the 
case, may be set forth as a ground of objection in the memorandum of appeal.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), where any party aggrieved by 
an order of remand made after the commencement of this Code from which an 
appea11ies does not appeal there from, he shall thereafter be precluded from disputing its 
correctness.  

106. Where an appeal from any order is allowed it shall lie to the Court to which an 
appeal would lie from the decree in the suit in which such order was made, or where such 
order is made by a Court (not being a High Court) in the exercise  of appellate 
jurisdiction, then to the High Court.  
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO APPEALS  
107.-(1 ) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, an Appellate 
Court shall have power: - 
(a) to determine a case finally;  
(b) to remand a cas e; 
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;  
(d) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken.  
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers and shall 
perform as nearly as may be the same duties as are conferred and imposed by this Code 
on Courts of original jurisdiction in' respect of suits instituted therein.  
108. The provisions of this Part relating to appeal from original decrees shall, so far as 
may be, apply to appeal - 
(a) from appellate decrees, a nd 
(b) from orders made under this Code or under any special or local law in which a 
different procedure is not provided.  
 
APPEALS TO THE [SUPREME COURT]  
3[109. An appeal from a judgment decree or final order of a High Court shall lie to the 
Supreme Court -  
(a) if the amount or value or the subject -matter or the dispute in the court of first instance 
was and also in appeal is (unless varied by an Act or Parliament) fifty thousand rupees or 
upward and the judgment decree or final order appealed from has var ied or set aside the 
judgment decree or final order of the Court immediately below; or  
(b) it the judgment, decree or final order involves directly or indirectly, some claim or 
question respecting property or the like amount or value and the judgment, decr ee of final 
order appealed from has varied of set aside the judgment decree or final order of the 
Court immediately below; or  
(c) if the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the 
interpretation of the Constitution .] 

110. [Omitted by Federal Adaptation of Laws Order (P.O.4 of 1975) w.e.f 1st August 
1975]  
111. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 109, no appeal shall lie to 4[the 
Supreme Court]  
(a) from the decree or order of one Judge of a High Court 5***, or of one Judge of a 
Division Court, or of two or more Judges of such High .Court, or of a Division Court, 
constituted by two or more Judges of such High Court, where such Judges are cqua11y 
divided in opinion and do not amount in number to a majority of t he whole of the Judges 
of the High Court at the time being; or  
(b) from any decree from which under section 102 no second appeal lies.  
111.A. -[Omitted by the Federal Court Act, 1941 (XXI of 1941), S. 2.]  
112.-2[(1) Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed - 
(a) to affect the powers of the Supreme Court under Article 3[191 of the Constitution or 
any other provision thereof] ; or  
(b) to interfere with any rules made by the Supreme Court, and for the time being in 
force, for the presentation of appeals t o that Court, or their conduct before that Court.]  
 
(2) Nothing herein contained applies to any matter of criminal or admiralty or vice -
admiralty jurisdiction, or to appeals from orders and decrees of Prize Courts.  
PART VII  
REFERENCE REVIEW AND REVISION  
113. Reference to High Court. - Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be 
prescribed, any Court may state a case and refer the same for the opinion of the High 
Court, and the High Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit.  
114. [Review. -(1) Subject as aforesaid, any person considering himself aggrieved - 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but from which no 
appeal has been preferred.  
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Code, or  
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, may apply for a review of 
judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order. And the Court may 
make such order thereon as it thinks fit.  

(2) Nothing contained in sub -section (1) shall apply to a review of any judgment 
pronounced or order made by the Supreme Court.]  
115.-1[(1 )} The High Court may call for the record of any case which bas been decided 
by any Court subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if 
such subordinate Court appears  
(a) to .have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or  
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material  
irregular ity, the High Court may make such order in the case as it thinks fit;  
2[Provided that where a person makes an application under this subsection, he shall in 
support of such application, furnish copies of the pleadings, documents and order of the 
subordinat e Court and the High Court shall, except for reasons to be recorded, dispose of 
such application without calling for the record of the subordinate Court.]  
3[Provided further that such application shall be made within ninety days of the decision 
of the sub ordinate Court] 4[which shall provide a copy of such decision within three days 
thereof and the High Court shall dispose of such application within six months],  
5[(2) The District Court may exercise the powers conferred on the High Court by 
subsection (I) in respect of any case decided by a Court subordinate to such District Court 
in which no appeal lies and the amount or value of the subject -matter whereof does not 
exceed the limits of the appellate jurisdiction of the District Court.  
(3) If any applicatio n under subsection (l) in respect of a case within the competence of 
the District Court has been made either to the High Court or the District Court, no further 
such application shall be made to either of them. (4) No proceedings in revision shall be 
enter tained by the High Court against an order made under subsection (2) by the District 
Court.]  
 
PART IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO 6* * *  
HIGH COURT  
116. This part applies only to High Courts 7****  
 
117. Save as provided in this Part or in Part X or in r ules, the provisions of this Code 
shall apply to 1*** High Courts.  
118. Where any 1*** High Court considers it necessary that a decree passed in the 
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction should be executed before the amount of the costs 

incurred in t he suit can be ascertained by taxation, the Court may order that the decree 
shall be executed forthwith except as to so much thereof as relates to the costs;  
and as to so much thereof as relates to the costs, that the decree may be executed as soon 
as the amount of the costs shall be ascertained by taxation.  
 
119. Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to authorize any person on behalf of another 
to address the Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, or to examine 
witnesses, except where the  Court shall have in the exercise of the power conferred by its 
charter authorized him so to do, or to interfere with the power of the High Court to make 
rules concerning advocates, vakils and attorneys.  
120.(1) The following provisions shall not apply to  the High Court in the exercise of its 
original civil jurisdiction, namely, sections 16, 17 and 20.  
 
PART X  
RULES  
121. The rules in the First Schedule shall have effect as if enacted in ,the body or this 
Code until annulled pt altered in accordance with th e provisions or this Part.  
122. 3[The High Courts] 4*** may, from time to time after previous publication, make 
rules regulating their own procedure and the procedure of the civil Courts subject to their 
superintendence, and may by such rules annul, alter or ad to all of any of the rules in the 
First Schedule.  
123 -(I) A Committee, to be called the Rule Committee, shall be constituted at J[the town 
which is the usual place of sitting of each of the High Courts 2. . . 30 . . referred to in 
section 122].  
(2) Each such Committee shall consist of the following persona namely: -  
(a) three Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee is 
constituted, one of whom at least has served as a District Judge or 4**** a Divisional 
Judge for thr ee years.  
(b) 5 * * * * * * *  
(c) 6[two advocates practising in that Court and].  
(d) a Judge of a Civil Court subordinate to the High Court, 7* * * *  
(3) The members of each such Committee shall be appointed by the Chief Justice 8* ** 
who shall also nomin ate one of their member to be president:  

Provided that, if the Chief Justice 8*** elects to be himself a member of a Committee, 
the number of other Judges appointed to be members shall be two and the Chief Justice 
8*** shall be the President of the Committ ee. 
(4) Each l11ember'of any such Committee shall bold office f or such period as may' be 
prescribed by the Chief Justice 8* * * in this behalf; and whenever any member retires. 
resigns, dies or ceases to reside in the Province in which the Committee was c onstituted, 
or becomes incapable of acting as a member of the Committee, the said Chief Justice 8* 
* * may appoint another person to' be a member in his stead.  
(5) There shall be a Secretary to each such Committee who shall be appointed by the 
Chief Justic e 8*** and shall receive such remuneration as may be provided in this behalf 
[by the Provincial Government].  
124. Every Rule Committee shall make a report to the High Court established at the town 
at which it is constituted on any proposal to annul alter o r add to the rules in the First 
Schedule or to make new rules, and before making any rules under section 122 the High 
Court shall take such report into consideration.  
125. * * * * * * * * * * . . . . .  
126. Rules made under the foregoing provisions shall b e subject to the previous approval 
of the Government of the Province in which the Court whose procedure the rules regulate 
is situate or, if that Court is not situate in any Province, to the previous approval of the 
4[Federal Government].  
127. Rules so ma de and 5[approved] shall be published in the 6[official Gazette ***], and 
shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may be specified have the 
same force and effect within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court which 
made  them, as if they had been contained in the Pint Schedule.  
128.-(1) Such rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions in the body of this Code, 
but, subject thereto, may provide for any maters relating to the procedure of civil Courts.  
(2) In part icular and without prejudice to the generality or the powers conferred by 
subsection (1), such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  
(a) the service of summonses, notices and other processes by post or in any other manner 
either generally or in any specified areas, and the proof of such service;  
(b) the maintenance and custody, while under attachment or livestock and other movable 
property the fees pay able for such maintenance and custody, the sale of such  
livestock and prope rty and the proceeds of such sale.  
(c) procedure in suits by way of counter claim, and the valuation of such suits for the 
purposes of jurisdiction;  

(d) procedure in garnishee and charging orders either fu addition to, or in substitution for, 
the attachme nt and sale of debts ;  
(e) procedure where the defendant claims to be entitled to contribution or indemnity over 
against any person whether a party to the suit or not;  
(f) summary procedure - 
(i) in suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in 
money payable by the defendant, with or without interest, arising on a contract express or 
implied;  
on an enactment where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the 
nature of debt other than a penalty; or  
on a guarantee, where the claim against the principle is in respect of a debt or a liquidated 
demand only; or on a trust; or  
(ii) in suits for the recovery of immovable property, with or without a claim for rent or 
mesne profits, by a landlord against a tenant whose term has expired or bas been only 
determined by notice to quit, or has become liable to forfeiture for non -payment of rent, 
or against persons claiming under such tenant;  
(g) procedure by way of originating summons;  
(h) conso1idation of suits, appeal s and other proceedings;  
(i) delegation to any Registrar, Prothonarary or master or other official of the Court of 
any judicial, quasi -judicial and non -judicial duties; and  
(j) all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be necessary or de sirable 
for the transaction of the business of civil Courts.  
 
129. Notwithstanding anything in this Code, any High Court 1*** may make such rules 
not inconsistent with 2[its Letters Patent] to regulate its own procedure in the exercise of 
its original civi l jurisdiction as it shall think fit, and nothing herein contained shall affect 
the validity of any such rules in force at the commencement of this Code.  
130. * * * * * * *  
131. Rule made in accordance with section 129 1* * * shall be published in the 2[of ficial 
Gazette * * *] and shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may be 
specified have the force of law.  
PART XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  

132.-(1) Women who according to the customs and manners of the country, ought not to 
be compelled to appe ar in public shall be exempt from personal appearance in Court.  
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt such women from arrest in 
execution of civil process in any case in which the arrest of women is not prohibited by 
this Code.  
133.-(1) T he 2[provincial Government] may, by notification in the [official Gazette], 
exempt from personal appearance in Court any person whole rank, in the opinion of such 
Government, entitles him to the privilege of exemption.  
(2) The names and residences of the persons so exempted shall, from time to time, be 
forwarded to the High Court by the [Provincial Government] and a list of such persons 
shall be kept in such Court, and a list of such persons as reside within the local limits of 
the jurisdiction of each Cou rt subordinate to the High Court shall be kept in such 
subordinate Court.  
(3) Where any person so exempted claims the privilege of such exemption and it is 
consequently necessary to examine him by party requiring his evidence pays the costs of 
that commiss ion, unless the party requiring his evidence pays such costs.  
134. The provisions of sections 55, 57 and 59 shall apply, so far as may be, to all persons 
arrest under this Code.  
135. (1) No Judge, Magistrate or other judicial office shall be liable to ar rest under civil 
process while going to, presiding in, or returning from, his Court.  
(2) Where any matter pending before a tribunal jurisdiction having jurisdiction therein, or 
believing in good faith that it has such jurisdiction, the parties thereto, th eir pleaders, 
mukhtars, revenne -agents and recognized agents, and their witnesses acting in obedience 
to a summons, shall be exempt from arrest under civil process other than process issued 
by such tribunal for contempt of Court while going to or attending  such tribunal for the 
purpose of such matter, and while returning from such tribunal.  
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) shall enable a judgment -debtor to claim exemption from 
arrest under an order for immediate execution or where such judgment -debtor attends  to 
show cause why he should not be committed to prison in execution of a decree.  
l35-A.-(I) No person sha1l be liable to arrest or detention in prison under civil process: - 
[(a) If he is member of Legislature 4 *** 5 *** during the continuance of any me eting of 
such Legislature 6**]  
 
[b) If he is member of any committee of such [Legislature 6* *], during the continuance 
of any meeting of such committee;  

 
5* * * * * *  
and during the fourteen days before and after such meeting of sitting.  
(2) A person rel eased from detention under subsection (1) shall, subject to the provisions 
of the said subsection, be liable to re -arrest and to the further detention to which he would 
have been liable if he had not been released under the provisions of sub -section (1)]  
 
136.-(1) Where an ap1ilication is made that and person shall be arrested or that property 
shall be attached under any provision of this Code not relating to the execution or decree, 
and such person resides or such property is situate outside the local limi ts of the 
jurisdiction of the Court to which the application is made the Court may in its direction, 
issue a warrant or arrest or make an order of attachment and send to the District Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such person or proper ty resides or is situated 
a copy of the warrant of orders, together with the probable amount of the costs of the 
arrest or attachment.  
(2) The District Court shall on receipt of such copy and amount, cause the arrest or 
attachment to be made by its own off icers, or by Court subordinate to itse1f, and shall 
inform the Court which issued or made such warrant or order of the arrest or attachment  
(3) The Court making an arrest under this location shall send the person arrested to the 
Court by which the warrant  of arrest was issued, unless he shows cause to the satisfaction 
of the former Court why he should not be sent to the latter Court, or unless he furnishes 
sufficient security for his appearance before the latter Court or for satisfying any decree 
that may be passed against him by that Court, in either of which cases the Court making 
the arrest shall release him.  
137. (1) The language which, on the commencement of this Code, is the language of any 
Court subordinate to a High Court shall continue to be the l anguage of such subordinate 
Court until the [Provincial Government] otherwise directs.  
 
(2) The [Provincial Government] may declare what shall be the language of any such 
Court and in what character applications to and proceedings in such Courts shall be 
written.  
(3) Where this Code requires or allows anything other than the recording or evidence to 
be done in writing in any such Court, such writing may be in English; but if any party or 
his pleader is unacquainted with English a translation into the lang uage of the Court shall, 
at his request, be supplied to him; and the Court shall make such order as it thinks fit in 
respect of the payment or the costs of such translation.  
138. The [High Court] may, by notification in the [official Gazette] direct with respect to 
any] judge specified in the notification or failing under a description act forth therein, that 

evidence in cases in which an appeal is allowed shall be taken down by him in the 
English language and in manner prescribed.  
(2) Where a Judge is pre vented by any sufficient reason from complying with a direction 
under subsection (1), he shall record the reason and cause the evidence to be taken down 
in writing from his dictation in open Court.  
139. In the case of any affidavit under this Code -  
(a) a ny Court or Magistrate, or  
(b) any officer or other person whom a High Court may appoint in this behalf, or ;  
(c) any officer appointed by any other Court which the [Provincial Government] has 
generally or specially empowered in this behalf, may administer  the oath to the deponent:  
140.--(1) In any Admiralty or Vice -Admiralty cause of salvage, towage or collision, the 
Court, whether it be exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction, may if it thinks fit 
and shall upon request of either party to su ch cause, summon to its assistance, in such 
manner as it may direct or as may be prescribed two competent assessors; and such 
assessor shall attend and assist accordingly:  
(2) Every such assessor shall receive such fees to for his attendance, to be paid by  such of 
the parties as the Court may direct or as may be prescribed.  
 
141. The procedure provided in this Code in regard to suits shall be followed as far as it 
can be made applicable, in all proceedings in any Court of civil jurisdiction.  
142. All orders  and notices served on or given to any person under the provision or this 
Code shall be in writing.  
143. Postage, where chargeable on a notice, summons or letter issued under this Code 
and forwarded by post and the fee for registering the same, shall be p aid within a time to 
be fixed before the communication is made:  
Provided that the [Provincial Government] 2* * * may remit such postage~ or fee or both 
or may prescribe a scale of court -fees to be levied in lieu thereof.  
144.-(1) Where and in so far as a decree is varied or reversed the Court of first instance 
shall on the application of any party entitled to any benefit by way of restitution or 
otherwise cause such restitution to be made as will, so far as may be, place the parties in 
the position which t hey would have occupied but for such decree of such part thereof as 
has been varied or reversed; and, for this purpose, the Court may make any orders, 
including orders for the refund of cost and for the payment of interested damages, 
compensation and mesne  profits, which are properly consequential on such variation or 
reversal.  

(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any restitution or other relief 
which could be obtained by application under subsection(1)  
145. Where any person has bec ome liable as surety:  
(a) For the performance of any decree or any part thereof; or  
(b) For the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree, or  
(c) For the payment of any money, or for the fulfillment of any condition imposed on any 
person,  under an order of the Court in any suit or in any proceedings consequent thereon, 
the decree or order may be executed against him to the extent to which he has rendered 
himself personally liable, in the manner herein provided for the execution of decrees,  and 
such person shall for the purposes of appeal be deemed a party within the meaning of 
section 47;  
Provided that such notice: as the Court in each case thinks sufficient has been given to the 
surety.  
146. Save as otherwise provided by the Code or by a ny law for the time being in force 
where any proceeding may be taken or application made by or against any person, then 
the proceedings may be taken or the application may be made by or against any person 
claiming under him.  
147. In all suits to which any person under disability is a party, any consent or agreement 
as to any proceeding shall, if liven or made with the express leave of the Court by the 
next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect as if such period, were 
under no disab ility and had given such consent or made such agreement.  
 
148.  Where any period is fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act 
prescribed or allowed by this Code the Court may, in its discretion, from time to, time, 
enlarge such period, even tho ugh the period originally fixed or granted may have 
expired.   
149.  Where the whole or any part of any fee prescribed for any document by the law 
for the time being in force relating to court fees has not been paid the Court may, in 
its discretion, at any s tage, allow the person, by whom such fee is payable, to pay the 
whole or part, as the case may be, of such court -fee is payable, to pay the whole or 
part, as the case may be, of such court -fee; and upon such payment the document, in 
respect of which such f ee is payable, shall have the same force and effect as if such fee 
is payable, shall have the same force and effect as if such fee had bee n paid in the first 
instance .  
150. Save as otherwise provided, where the business of any Court is transferred to any 
other Court, the Court to which the business is so transferred shall have the same powers 

and shall perform the same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed by or 
under this Code upon the Court from which the business was so transferred.  
151. N othing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power 
of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent 
abuse of the process of the Court.  
152. Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in jud gments, decrees or orders or errors arising 
therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any time be corrected by the Court 
either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.  
153. The Court may at any time, and on such terms as t o costs or otherwise as it may 
think fit, amend any defect or error in any proceeding in a suit; and all necessary 
amendments shal1 be made for the purpose of determining the real question or issue 
raised by or depending on such proceeding.  
154. [Omitted by Ordinance (27 of 1981), Second Sched., item 46(11)].  
155. [Omitted by ibid].  
156. Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act 1914 (XVII of 1914), s.3 and 
Second Schedule.  
157. Notifications published, declarations and rules made, places appointed, ag reements 
filed, scales prescribed, forms framed, appointments made and powers conferred under 
Act VIII of 1859 or under any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending the same or 
under any other enactment hereby repealed shall, so far as they are consiste nt with this 
Code, have the same force and effect as if they had been respectively published, made, 
appointed, filed, prescribed, framed and conferred under this Code and by the authority 
empowered thereby in such behalf.  
158. In every enactment or notifi cation passed or issued before the commencement of this 
Code in which reference is made to or to any Chapter or section of Act VIII of 1859 or 
any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending the same or any other enactment 
hereby repealed, such reference s hall, so far as may be practicable, be taken to be made to 
this Code or to its corresponding Part, Order, section or rule.  
 
ORDER I  
PARTIES SUITS  
 
1. All persons may be joined in one suit as Plaintiffs in whom any right to [relief in 
respect of or transact ion or series of acts or transactions is alleged to exit, whether jointly, 

severally or in the alternative, where, if such persons brought separate suits, any common 
question of law or fact would arise.  
2. Where it appears to the Court that any joinder of plaintiffs may embarrass or delay the 
trial of the suit, the Court may put the plaintiffs to their election or order separate trials or 
make such other order as may be expedient.  
3. All persons may be joined as defendants against whom any right to relief i n respect of 
or arising out of the same act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is alleged to 
exist, Whether jointly, severally or in the alternatively, where, if separate suits were 
brought against such persons, any common quest on of law or fact would arise.  
4. Judgment may be given without any amendment - 
5. It shall not be necessary that every defendant shall be interested as to all the relief 
claimed in any suit against him.  
6. The plaintiff may, at his option, join as same suit nil or any  of the persons severally, 
severally, liable on any one contract, including exchange, hundis and promissory notes.  
7. Where the plaintiff is in doubt as to the person from whom be is entitled to obtain 
redress, he may join two or more defendants in order t hat the question as to winch of the 
defendants is liable, and to what extent, may be determined as between all parties.  
8. (l) Where there are numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, one or more 
of such persons may, with the permission of th e Court, sue or be sued, or may defend, in 
such suit, on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so interested. But the Court shall in 
such case give, at the plaintiff's expense, notice of the institution of the suit to all such 
persons either by perso nal service or, where from the number of persons or any other 
cause such service is not reasonably practicable, by public advertisement, as the Court in 
each case may direct.  
9. No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or non -joinder of partie s, and the 
Court may in the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the 
parties actually before it.  
10. (1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the wrong person as plaintiff 
or where it is  
doubtful whether it has be en instituted in the name of the right plaintiff, the Court 
may at any stage of the suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted through a 
bona fide mistake, and that it is necessary for the determination of the real matter in 
dispute so to do, ord er any other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon 
such terms as the Court thinks just.  
(2) The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or without the 
application of either party, and on such terms as may appear to the Court to  be just, 

order that the name of any party improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or 
defendant, struck out, and that the name of any person who ought to have been 
joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence before the Court may 
be necessa ry in order to enable the Court unless the as may be the plaint thinks fit, 
effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in 
the suit, be added.  
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend o r as the next 
friend of a plaintiff under any disability without his consent.  
(4) Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall, Court otherwise directs, be 
amended. in such manner necessary, and amended copies of the summons and of 
shall be served on the n ew defendant and, if the Court on the original defendant.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of the (IX of 1908], section 22, the proceedings added as 
defendant shall be deemed to service of the summons.  
11. The Court may give the conduct of the suit to such pe rson as it deems.  
12. (l) here there are more plaintiffs than one, any one or more of them may be authorized 
by any other of them to appear, plead or act for such other, in any proceedings; and in 
like manner, where there are more defendants than one, any  one or more of them may be 
authorized by any other of them to appear, plead or act for such other in any proceeding.  
(2) The authority shall be in writing signed by the party giving it and shall be filed in 
Court.  
13. Alt objections on the ground of non -joinder or misjoinder of parties shall be taken at 
the earliest possible opportunity and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or before 
such settlement, unless the ground of objection has subsequently, arisen, and any such 
objection not so taken shall  be deemed to have been waived.  
 
ORDER II  
FRAME OF SUIT  
1. Every suit shall as far as practicable be framed so as to afford ground for final decision 
upon the subjects in dispute and to prevent further litigation concerning them.  
2. (1) Every suit shall in clude the whole of the claim which the plaintiff is entitled to 
make in respect of the cause of action; but a plaintiff may relinquish any portion of his 
claim in order to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of any Court.  
(2) Where a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally relinquishes, any portion 
of his claim, he shall not afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or 
relinquished claim.  

(3) A person entitled to more than one relief in respect of the same cause of action may 
sue for all or any of such relief; but if no omits, except with the leave of the Court, to sue 
for all such relief, he shall not afterwards sue for any relief so omitted.  
Explanation: For the purposes of this rule an obligation and a collateral security for i ts 
performance and successive claims arising under the same obligation shall be deemed 
respectively to constitute but one cause of action.  
Illustration:  
A lets a house to B at a yearly rent of Rs.1,200. The rent for the whole of the years 1905, 
1906 and 1907 is due and unpaid. A sues B in 1908 only for the rent due for 1906. A 
shall not afterwards sue B for the rent due for 1905 or 1907.  
 
 
3.- (1) Save as otherwise provided, a plaintiff may unite in the same suit several causes of 
action against the same defendant, or the same defendants jointly; and any plaintiffs 
having causes of action in which they are jointly interested against the same defendant or 
the same defendants jointly may unite such causes of action in the same suit.  
(2) Where causes of actio n are united, the jurisdiction of the Court as regards the suit 
shall depend on the amount or value of the aggregate subject matters at the date of 
instituting the suit.  
 
4.- No cause of action shall, unless with the leave of the Court, be joined with a su it for 
the recovery of immovable property, except - 
(a) Claims for mesne profits or arrears of rent in respect of ~he property claimed or any 
part thereof;  
(b) Claims for damages for breach of any contract under which the property or any part 
thereof is hel d; and  
(c) Claims in which the relief sought is based on the same cause of action;  
 
Provided that nothing in this rule shall be deemed to prevent any party in a suit for 
foreclosure o~ redemption from asking to be put into possession of the mortgaged 
property. 
5. No claim by or against an executor, administrator or heir, as such, shall be joined with 
claims by or against him personally, unless the last mentioned claims are alleged to arise 
with reference to the estate in respect of which the Plaintiff or d efendant sues or is sued 
as executor, administrator or heir, or are such a~ he was entitled to, or liable for, jointly 
with the deceased person whom he represent.  

6. Where it appears to the Court that any causes of action joined in one suit cannot be 
conve niently tried or disposed of together, the Court may order separate trials or make 
such other order as may be expedient.  
7. All objections on the ground of misjoinder of causes of action shall be taken at the 
earliest possible opportunity and, in all cases  where issues arc settled, at or before such 
settlement, unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen, and any such 
objection not so taken shall be deemed to have waived.  
 
ORDER III  
RECOGNIZED AGENTS AND PLEADERS  
1. Any appearance, application o r act in or to any Court, required or authorized by law to 
be made or done by a party in such Court, may, except where otherwise expressly 
provided by any law for the time being in force, be made or done by the party in person, 
or by his recognized agent, or by a pleader [appearing, applying or acting, as the case 
may be,] on his behalf:  
 
Provided that any such appearance shall, if the Court so directs, be made by the party in 
person.  
2. The recognized agent of parties by whom such appearances, applications  and acts may 
be made or done are - 
(a) persons holding powers -of-attorney, authorizing them to make and do ouch 
appearances, applications and acts on behalf of such parties ;  
(b) persons carrying on trade or business for and in the names of parties not res ident 
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the appearance, 
application or act is made or done, in matters connected with such trade or business only 
where no other agent is expressly authorized to make and do such ap pearances, 
applications and acts.  
3.-(l) Processes served on the -recognized agent of a party shall be as effectual as if the 
same had been served on the in person, unless the Court otherwise directs.  
 
(2) The provisions for the service of process on a par ty to a suit shall apply to the service 
of process on his recognized agent.  
2[4-(l) No pleader shall act for any person in unless he has been appointed for the 
purpose by such a document in writing signed by such person or by his agent or by some 
other per son duly authorized by power of attorney to make such appointment.  

(2) Every such appointment shall be filed in Court arid shall be deemed to be in force 
until determined with the leave of the Court by a writing signed by the client or the 
pleader, as the case may be, and filed in Court or until the client or the pleader dies, or 
until all proceedings in the suit are ended so far as regards the client.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -rule (2) an application for review of judgment, an application, 
tinder section  144 or section 152 of this Code, any appeal from any decree or order in the 
suit end any application or act for the purpose of obtaining copies of documents or return 
of documents produced or filed in the suit or of obtaining refund of monies paid into th e 
Court in connection with the suit shall be deemed to be proceedings in the suit.  
 
 
 
(4) The High Court may, by general order, direct that, where the person by whom a 
pleader is appointed is unable to write his name, his mark upon the document appointing 
the pleader shall be attested by such person and in such manner as may be specified by 
the order.  
(5) No pleader who has been engaged for the purpose of pleading only shall plead on 
behalf of any party, unless he has filed in Court a memorandum of appearan ce signed by 
himself and stating - 
(a) the names of the parties to the suit,  
(b) the name of the party for whom he appears, and  
(c) the name of the person by whom he is authorized to appear.  
Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall apply to any pleader engaged to plead on 
behalf of any party by any other pleader who has been duly appointed to act in Court on 
behalf of such party.  
5. Any process served on the pleader of any party or left at the office or ordinary 
residence of such pleader, and whether the  same is for the personal appearance of the 
party or not, shall be presumed to be duly communicated and made known to the party 
whom the pleader represents, and, unless the Court otherwise directs, shall be as effectual 
for all purposes as if the same had been given to or served on the party in person.  
6.-(1) Besides the recognized agents described in rule 2 any person residing within the 
jurisdiction of the Court may be appointed an agent to accept service of process.  
(2) Such appointment maybe special or general and shall be made by an instrument in 
writing signed by the principal, and such instrument or, if the appointment is general, a 
certified copy thereof shall be filed in Court.  

 
ORDER IV  
INSTITUTION OP SUITS  
1.-(l) Every suit shall be instituted by  presenting a plaint to the Court or such officer as it 
appoints in this behalf.  
(2) Every plaint shall comply with the rules contained Orders VI and VII, so far as they 
are applicable.  
2. The Court shall cause the particulars of every suit to be entered i n a book to be kept for 
the purpose and called the register of civil suits. Such entries shall be numbered in every 
year according to the order in which the plaints are admitted.  
 
 
 
ORDER V  
ISSUE AND SERVICE OF SUMMONS  
 
1.----(l) When a suit has been duly instituted a summons may Summons be issued to the 
defendant to appear and answer the claim on a day to tie therein specified Provided that 
no defendant has appeared  
admitted the plaintiff's claim.  
(2) A defendant to whom a summons has been issued under sub -rule (I) may appear - 
(a) in person, or  
(b) by a pleader duly instructed and able to answer all material questions relating to the 
suit, or  
(c) by a pleader accompanied by some person able to answer all such questions.  
(3) Every such summons shall be signe d by the Judge or such officer as he appoints, and 
shall be sealed with the seal of the Court.  
2. Every summons shall be accompanied by a copy of the plaint or, if so permitted, by a 
concise statement.  
3.-1 Where the Court sees reason to require the appear ance of the defendant, the 
summons shall order him to appear in person in Court on the day therein specified.  
(2) Where the Court sees reason to require the personal appearance of the Plaintiff on the 
same day, it shall make an order for such appearance.  
4. No party shall be ordered to appear in person unless he resides - 

(a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary original jurisdiction, or  
(b) without such limits but at a place less than fifty or (where there is railway or steamer 
communication or  other established public conveyance for five -sixth of the distance 
between the place where he resides and the place where the Court is situate) less than two 
hundred miles distance from the Court -house.  
5. The Court shall determine, at the time of issuing  the summons, whether it shall be for 
the settlement of issues only, or for the final disposal of the suit ; and the summons shall 
contain a direction accordingly  
Provided that, in every suit heard by a Court of Small Causes, the summons shall be for 
the final disposal of the suit.  
6. The day for the appearance of the defendant shall be fixed with reference to the current 
business of the Court, the place of residence of the defendant and the time necessary for 
the service of the summons; and the day shall b e so fixed as to allow the defendant 
sufficient time to enable him to appear and answer on such day.  
7. The summons to appear and answer shall order the defendant to produce all documents 
in his possession or power upon which he intends to rely in support of his case.  
8. Where the summons is for the final disposal of t shall also direct the defendant to 
produce, on the day his appearance, all witnesses upon whose evidence he I rely in 
support of his case.  
9.- (1) Where the defendant resides within the juri sdiction of the Court in which the suit 
is instituted, or has an agent resident within that jurisdiction who is empowered to accept 
the service of the summons, the summons shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, be 
delivered or sent to the proper office r to be served by him or one of his subordinates.  
(2) The proper officer may be an officer of a Court other than that in which the suit is 
instituted, and, where he is such an officer, the summons may be sent to him by post or in 
such other manner as the C ourt may direct.  
1[(3) Unless the Court otherwise directs, the proper officer or an officer authorized by 
him in this behalf shall cause the service of summons and return it to the Court within 
fifteen days of issue of summons.]  
10. Service of the summons shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof 
signed by the Judge or such officer, as he appoints in this behalf, and sealed with the seal 
of the Court.  
2[10-A.-(1) simultaneously, with the issue of summons under rule 9, there shall be sent, 
unless to the defendant, by registered other copy of the summons provided in rule 10.  
(2) An acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the defendant of the receipt of the 
registered communication or an endorsement by a postal employee that the defendant 

refus ed to take delivery of the same shall be deemed by the Court issuing the summons to 
be prima facie proof of service of summons.  
11. Save as otherwise prescribed, defendants than one, service of the summons each 
defendant.  
12. Wherever it is practicable, se rvice shall be made on the defendant in person, unless he 
has an agent empowered to accept service, in which case service on such agent shall be 
sufficient.  
13.-(l) In a suit relating to any business or work against a person who does not reside 
within; the  local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court from which the summons is issued, 
service on any manager or agent, who, at the time of service, personally carries on such 
business or works for such person within such limits, shall be deemed good service.  
(2) For the purpose of this rule the master of a ship shall be deemed to be the agent of the 
owner or character.  
14. Where in a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable 
property, service cannot be made on the defendant in per son, and the defendant has no 
agent empowered to accept the service, it may be made on any agent of the defendant in 
charge of the property.  
 
15. Where in any suit the defendant cannot be found and has no agent empowered to 
accept service of the summons on  his behalf, service may be made on any adult male 
member of the family of the defendant who is residing with him.  
Explanation: A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this rule.  
16. Where the serving officer delivers or tenders a cop y of the summons to the defendant 
personally, or to an agent or other person on his behalf, he shall require the signature of 
the person to whom the copy is so delivered or tendered to an acknowledgment of service 
endorsed on the original summons.  
17. Wher e the defendant or his agent or such other person as aforesaid refuses to sign the 
acknowledgment, or where the serving officer, after using all due and reasonable 
diligence, cannot find the defendant, and there is no agent empowered to accept service 
of the summons on his behalf, nor any other person on whom service can be made, the 
serving officer shall affix a copy of the summons on the outer door or some other 
conspicuous part of the house in which the defendant ordinarily resides or carries on 
business  or personally works for gain, and shall then return the original to the Court from 
which it was issued, with a report endorsed thereon or annexed thereto stating that he has 
so affixed the copy, the circumstances under which he did so, and the name and ad dress 
of the person (if any), by whom the house was identified and in whose presence the copy 
was affixed.  

18. The serving officer shall, in all cases in which the summons has been served under 
rule 16, endorse or annex, or cause to be endorsed or annexed,  on or to the original 
summons, a return stating the time when and the manner in which the summons was 
served, and the name and address of the person (if any) identifying the person served and 
witnessing the delivery or tender of the summons.  
19. Where a s ummons is returned under rule 17, the Court shall, if the return under that 
rule has not been verified by the affidavit of the serving officer, and may, if it has been so 
verified, examine the serving officer on oath, or cause him to be so examined by anot her 
Court, touching his proceedings, and may make such further inquiry in the matter as it 
thinks fit; and shall either declare that the summons has been duly served or order such 
service as it thinks fit.  
20.-(l) Where the Court is satisfied that there is  reason to believe that the defendant is 
keeping out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service, or that for nay other reason 
the summons cannot be served in the ordinary way, the Court shall order for service of 
the summons by -  
 
(a) affixing a copy o f the summons at some conspicuous part of the house, if any, in 
which the defendant is known to have last resided or carried on business or personally 
worked for gain; or  
(b) any electronic device of communication which may include telegram, phonogram, 
telex, fax, radio and television; or  
(c) urgent mail service or public courier services; or  
(d) beat of drum in the locality where the defendant resides; or  
(e) publication in press; or  
(f) any other manner or mode as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Court  may order the use of all or any of the aforesaid manners and 
modes of service simultaneously].  
(2) Service substituted by order of the Court shall be as effectual as if it had been made 
on the defendant personally.  
(3) Where service is substituted by orde r of the Court, the Court shall fix such time for 
the appearance of the defendant as the case may require [which shall not ordinarily 
exceed fifteen days].  
 
21. A summons may be sent by the Court by which it is issued, whether within or without 
the Provinc e, either by one of its officers or by post to any Court (not being the High 
Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the defendant resides.  
 
22. Omitted by the A. 0., 1949.  

23. The Court to which a summons is sent under rule 2 * * shall, upon receipt  thereof, 
proceed as if it had been issued by such Court and shall then return the summons to the 
Court of issue, together with the record (if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto in a 
prison, the otherwise to the defendant.  
25. Where the defendant resides out of 3[Pakistan] and has no agent in 3[Pakistan] 
empowered to accept service, the summons shall 4[except in the cases mentioned in rule 
26-A] be addressed to the defendant at the place where he is residing and sent to him by 
post. If the is posta l communication between such place and the place where the Court is 
situate.  
26. Where: -  
(a) In the enteric of any foreign 3[or extra -provincial jurisdiction vested in the Central 
(3ovcrnment), a Political Agent has been appointed, or a Court has been es tablished or 
continued, with power to serve a summons issued by a Court under this Code in any 
foreign territory in which the defendant resides, or  
(b) 3[the Provincial Government] has, by notification in the of1iciaI Gazette], declared, 
in respect of any Court situate In any such territory and not established or con -wined in 
the exercise of any such jurisdiction as aforesaid that service by such Court of any 
summons 6[issued under this Code by a Court of the Province] shall be deemed to be 
valid service,]  
the summons may be sent to such Political Agent or Court, by post or otherwise, for the 
purpose of being served upon the defendant ; and, if the Political Agent or Court returns 
the summons with an endorsement signed by such Political Agent or by the Judge  or 
other officer of the Court that the summons has been served on the defendant in manner 
hereinbefore directed, such endorsement shall be deemed to be evidence of service.  
[26-A. where the defendant is a servant (not belonging to the military, naval or a ir forces) 
of any Government in India, or civil public a servant of a railway company or local 
authority in India, the officer or on summons together with a copy of it to be retained by 
the defendant shall be sent, with a request that it may be served on t he defendant.  
(a) In the case of a defendant serving in connection with the affairs of the Government of 
India or a servant of a Railway in India, to the Secretary to the Government of India in 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, and  
(b) in the case of a defen dant serving in connection with the affairs of any other 
Government in India, or in the case of a servant of a local authority in India, to the Home 
Secretary to that Government or, as the case may be to the Home Secretary to the 
Government in whose territ ories the local authority has its jurisdiction.  
27. Where the defendant is a public officer (not belonging to the armed forces of 
Pakistan) or is the servant of a railway company or local authority, the Court may, if it 

appears to it that the summons may be most conveniently so served, send if for service on 
the defendant to the head of the office in which he is employed, together with a copy to 
be retained by the defendant.  
28. Where the defendant is a soldier, [sailor] [or airman] the Court shall send t he 
summons for service to his commanding officer together with a copy to be retained by 
the defendant.  
29. (1) Where a summons is delivered or sent to any person for service under rule 24, rule 
27 or rule 28, such person shall be bound to serve it, if pos sible, and to return it under his 
signature with the written acknowledgement of the defendant, and such signature shall be 
deemed to be evidence of service.  
(2) Were from any cause service is impossible, the summons shall be returned to the 
Court with a f ull statement of such cause and of the steps taken to procure service, and 
such statement shall be deemed to be evidence of non -service.  
30. (1) The Court may, notwithstanding anything herein before contained, substitute for a 
summons a letter signed by t he Judge or such officer as he may appoint in this behalf, 
where the defendant is, in the opinion of the Court, of a rank entitling him to such mark 
of consideration.  
(2) A letter substituted under sub -rule (1) shall contain all the particulars required t o be 
stated in summons, and, subject to the provisions of sub -rule (3), shall be treated in all 
respects as a summons.  
(3) A letter so substituted may be sent to the defendant by post or by a special messenger 
selected by the Court, or in any other manner  which the Court thinks fit; and where the 
defendant has an agent empowered to accept service, the letter may be delivered or sent 
to such agent.  
ORDER VI  
PLEADINGS GENERALLY  
1. "Pleading" shall mean plaint or written statement.  
2. Every pleading shall contain, and contain only, a statement in a concise form of the 
material facts on which the party pleading relies for his claim or defence, as the case may 
be, but not the evidence by which they are to be proved, and shall, when necessary, be 
divided into paragraphs, numbered consecutively -Dates, sums and numbers shall be 
expressed in figures.  
3. The forms in Appendix A when applicable, and where they are not applicable forms of 
the like character, as nearly as may be, shall be used for all pleadings.  

4. In all cases in which the party pleading relies on any misrepresentation, fraud, breach 
of trust, willful default, or undue influence, and in all other cases in which particulars 
may be necessary beyond such as are exemplified in the forms aforesaid, parti culars (with 
dates and items if necessary) shall be stated in the pleading.  
5. A further and better statement of nature of the claim or defence, or further and better 
particulars of any matter stated in any pleading, may in all cases be ordered, upon such  
terms as to costs and otherwise, as may be just.  
6. Any condition precedent the performance or occurrence of which is intended to be 
contested, shall be distinctly specified in his pleading by the plaintiff or defendant, as the 
case may be; and, subject thereto, an averment of the performance or occurrence of all 
conditions precedent necessary for the case of the plaintiff or defendant shall be implied 
in his pleading.  
7. No pleading shall, except by way of amendment, raise any new ground of claim or 
contain any allegation of fact inconsistent with the previous pleadings of the party 
pleading the same.  
8. Where a contract is alleged in any pleading, a bare denial of the same by the opposite -
party shall be construed only as a denial in fact of the express  contract alleged or of the 
matters of fact from which the same may be implied, and not as a denial of the legality or 
sufficiency in law of such contract.  
9. Wherever the contents of any document are material, it shall be sufficient in any 
pleading to st ate the effect thereof as briefly as possible, without setting out the whole or 
any part thereof, unless the precise words of the document or any part thereof are 
material.  
10. Wherever it is material to allege, malice fraudulent intention, knowledge or o ther 
condition of the mind of any person, it shall be sufficient to allege the same as a fact 
without setting out the circumstances from which the same is to be inferred.  
11. Wherever it is material to allege notice to any person of any fact, matter or th ing, it 
shall be sufficient to allege such notice as a fact, unless the form or the precise terms of 
such notice, or the circumstances from which such notice is to be inferred, are material.  
12. Whenever any contract or any relation between any persons is to be implied from a 
series of letters or conversations or otherwise from a number of circumstances, it shall be 
sufficient to allege such contract or relation as a fact, and to refer generally to such 
letters, conversations or circumstances without settin g them out in detail. And if in such 
case the person so pleading desires to rely in the alternative upon more contracts or 
relations than one as to be implied from such circumstances, he may state the same in the 
alternative.  

13. Neither party need in any  pleading allege any matter of fact which the law presumes 
in his favour or as to which the burden of proof lies upon the other side unless the same 
has first been specifically denied (e.g., consideration for a bill of exchange where the 
plaintiff sues onl y on the bill and not for the consideration as a substantive ground of 
claim).  
14. Every pleading shall be signed by the party and his pleader (if any): Provided that 
where a party pleading is, by reason of absence or for other good cause, unable to sign 
the pleading, it may be signed by any person duly authorized by him to sign the same or 
to sue or defend on his behalf.  
 
15. (1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, every pleading 
shall be verified [on oath or solemn affirma tion] at the foot by the party or by one of the 
parties pleading or by some other person proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be 
acquainted with the facts of the case.  
(2) The person verifying shall specify, by reference to the numbered paragraphs o f the 
pleading, what he verifies of his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information  
(3) The verification shall be signed by the person making it and shall state the date on 
which and the place at which it was signed.  
 
16. The Court may at any sta ge of the proceedings order to be struck out or amended any 
matter in any pleading which may be unnecessary or scandalous or which may tend to 
prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the suit.  
17. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allo w either party to alter or amend his 
pleadings in such manner and on such terms as may be just, and all such amendments 
shall be made as may be necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in 
controversy between the parties.  
18. If a party who has obtained an order for leave to amend does not amend accordingly 
within the time limited for that purpose by the order, or if no time is thereby limited then 
within fourteen days from the date of the order, he shall not be permitted to amend after 
the expiration of such limited time as aforesaid or of such fourteen days, as the case may 
be, unless the time is extended by the Court.  
ORDER VII  
 
PLAINT  
1. The plaint shall contain the following particulars: - 

a) the name of the Court in which the suit is  brought;  
b) the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff;  
c) the name, description and place of residence of the defendant, so far as they can be 
ascertained;  
d) where the plaintiff or the defendant is a minor or a person of unsound mind,  a 
statement to that effect;  
e) the facts constituting the cause of action and when it arose;  
f) the facts showing that the Court has jurisdiction;  
g) the relief which the plaintiff claims;  
h) where the plaintiff has allowed a set -off or relinquished a por tion of his claim, the 
amount so allowed or relinquished; and  
i) a statement of the value of the subject -matter of the suit for the purposes of jurisdiction 
and of court -fees so far as the case admits.  
2. Where the plaintiff seeks the recovery of money, th e plaint shall state the precise 
amount claimed;  
But where the plaintiff sues for mesne profits, or for an amount which will be found due 
to him on taking unsettled accounts between him and the defendant, the plaint shall state 
approximately the amount sue d for.  
3. Where the subject -matter of the suit is immovable property, the plaint shall contain a 
description of the property sufficient to identify it, and, in case such property can be 
identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement of surve y, the plaint shall 
specify such boundaries or numbers.  
4. Where the plaintiff sues in a representative character the plaint shall show not only that 
he has an actual existing interest in the subject -matter, but that he has taken the steps(if 
any) necessar y to enable him to institute a suit concerning it.  
5. The plaint shall show that the defendant is or claims to be interested in the subject -
matter, and that he is liable to be called upon to answer the plaintiff's demand.  
6. Where the suit is instituted af ter the expiration of the period prescribed by the law of 
limitation, the plaint shall show the ground upon which exemption from such law is 
claimed.  
7. Every plaint shall state specifically the relief which the plaintiff claims either simply or 
in the alt ernative, and it shall not be necessary to ask for general or other relief which the 
plaintiff claims either simply or in the alternative, and it shall not be necessary to ask for 
general or other relief which may always be given as the Court may think jus t to the same 
extent as if it had been asked for. And the same rule shall apply to any relief claimed by 
the defendant in his written statement.  

8. Where the plaintiff seeks relief in respect of several distinct claims or causes of action 
founded upon sepa rate and distinct grounds they shall be stated as far as may be 
separately and distinctly.  
9. The plaintiff shall endorse on the plaint, or annex thereto, a list of the documents (if 
any) which he has produced along with it.  
1(A) [The plaintiff shall prese nt with his plaint -  
a) As many copies on plain paper of the plaint as there are defendants, plus two extra 
copies, unless the Court, by reason of the length of the plaint or the number of the 
defendants, or for any other sufficient reason, permits him to  present a like number of 
concise statements of the nature of the claim made, or of the relief claimed in the suit, in 
which case he shall present such statements; and  
b) Draft forms of summons and fees for service thereof]  
2. Where the plaintiff sues, or  the defendant or any of the defendants is sued, in a 
representative capacity, such statements shall show in what capacity the plaintiff or 
defendant sues or is sued.  
3. The plaintiff may, by leave of the Court, amend such statements so as to make them 
correspond with the plaint.  
4. The chief ministerial officer of the Court shall sign such list and copies or statements 
if, on examination, he finds them to be correct.  
10-(1) The plaint shall at any stage of the suit be returned to be presented to the Court in 
which the suit should have been instituted.  
(2) On returning a plaint the Judge shall endorse thereon the date of its presentation and 
return, the name of the party presenting it, and a brief statement of the reasons for 
returning it.  
11. The plaint sha ll be rejected in the following cases: - 
a) where it does not disclose a cause of action:  
b) where the relief claimed is under -valued, and the plaintiff, on being required by the 
Court to correct the valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails t o do so:  
c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the plaint is written upon paper 
insufficiently stamped, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the 
requisite stamp -paper within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so: 
d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law.  
12. Where a plaint is rejected the Judge shall record an order to that effect with the 
reasons for such order.  
13. The rejection of the plaint on any of the grounds her einbefore mentioned shall not of 
its own force preclude the plaintiff from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the same 
cause of action.  
Documents relied on in Plaint  

14.-(1) Where a plaintiff sues upon a document in his possession or power, he shall 
produce it in Court when the plaint is presented, and shall at the same time deliver the 
document or a copy thereof to be filed with the plaint.  
(2) Where he relies on any other documents (whether in his possession or power or not) 
as evidence in support of  his claim, he shall enter such documents in a list to be added or 
annexed to the plaint.  
15. Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the plaintiff, he shall, 
if possible, state in whose possession or power it is.  
16. Where the suit is  founded upon a negotiable instrument, and it is proved that the 
instrument is lost, and an indemnity is given by the plaintiff, to the satisfaction of the 
Court, against the claims of any other person upon such instrument, the Court may pass 
such decree a s it would have passed if the plaintiff had produced the instrument in Court 
when the plaint was presented, and had at the same time delivered a copy of the 
instrument to be filed with the plaint.  
17. - (1) Save in so far as is other wise provided by he Ba nkers' Books Evidence Act, 
1891, where the document on which the plaintiff sues is an entry in a shop -book or other 
account in his possession or power, the plaintiff shall produce the book or account a the 
time of filing the plaint, together with a copy of  the entry on which he relies.  
(2) The Court, or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall forthwith mark the 
document for the purpose of identification; and after examining and comparing the copy 
with the original, shall, if it is found correct, c ertify it to be so and return the book to the 
plaintiff and cause the copy to be filed.  
18 - (1) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the plaintiff when the plaint 
is presented, or to be entered in the list to be added or annexed to the pliant , and which is 
not produced, or entered accordingly, shall not, without the leave of the Court, be 
received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit.  
(2) Nothing in this rule applies to documents produced for cross -examination of the 
defendant' s witnesses, or in answer to any case set up by the defendant or handed to a 
witness merely to refresh his memory.  
19 - (1) Every plaint or original petition shall be accompanied by a proceeding giving an 
address at which service of notice, summons or othe r process may be made on the 
plaintiff or petitioner.  
(2) Plaintiffs or petitioners subsequently added shall immediately on being so added file a 
proceeding of this nature.  
(3) The address filed under this rule shall be entered in the Register of suits mai ntained 
under Order IV, rule 2.  

20. An address for service filed under the preceding rule shall be within the local limits of 
the District Court within which the suit or petition is filed, or of the District Court within 
which the party ordinarily resides.  
21. Where a plaintiff or petitioner fails to file an address for service, he shall be liable to 
have his suit dismissed or his petition rejected by the Court suo motto or any party may 
apply for an order to that effect and the Court may make such order as  it thinks just.  
22. (1) Where a party is not found at the address given by him for service and no agent or 
adult male member of his family on whom a notice, summons or other process can be 
served is present, a copy of the notice, summons or other process shall be fixed to the 
outer door of the house.  
(2) If, on the date fixed, such party is not present, another date shall be fixed and a copy 
of the notice, summons or other process shall be sent to the said address by registered 
post, and such service shall  be deemed to be as effectual as if the notice, summons or 
other process had been personally served.  
23. Where a party engages a pleader, notices summons or other processes for service on 
him shall be served in the manner prescribed by Order III, rule 5, u nless the Court directs 
service at the address for service given by the party.  
24. A party who desires to change the address for service given by him as aforesaid shall 
file a verified petition, and the Court may direct the amendment of the record 
accordin gly. Notice of such petition shall be given to such other parties to the suit as the 
Court may deem it necessary to inform, and may be either served upon the pleaders for 
such parties or be sent to them by registered post, as the Court thinks fit.  
25. Noth ing in these rules shall prevent the Court from directing the service of a notice, 
summons or other process in any other manner, if for any reasons, it thinks fit to do so.  
26 - (1) In every suit of the nature referred to in rule 3, Order XXII, the plaint shall be 
accompanied by a statement giving - 
(a) the names and addresses of the persons who, in the event of the death of the plaintiff, 
may be made a party as his legal representatives;  
(b) the name and address of the person who, in the event of the death  of the plaintiff, shall 
intimate such fact to the Court, furnish the Court with the names, particulars and 
addresses of the legal representatives of the plaintiff and make an application for the legal 
representatives to be made a party.  
(2) A plaintiff ma y at any time - 

(a) file in the Court an amended list, of his presumptive legal representatives;  
(b) nominate another person, in the place of the person nominated under clause (b) of 
sub-rule (1), for the purposes of that clause.  
(3) A nomination made unde r clause (b) of sub -rule (1) shall, unless varied under clause 
(b) of sub -rule (2), remain in force throughout the pendency of the suit and any 
proceedings a rising therefrom, including appeal, revision and review.  
ORDER VIII  
WRITTEN STATEMENT AND SET -OFF  
1. The defendant may, and, if so required by the Court, shall at or before the first hearing 
or within such time as the Court may permit, permit, present a written statement of his 
defence:  
[Provided that the period allowed for filing the written statement  shall not ordinarily 
exceed[thirty] days]  
2. The defendant must raise by his pleading all matters, which show the suit not to be 
maintainable, or that the transaction is either void or voidable in point of law, and all such 
grounds of defence as, if not r aised, would raise issues of fact not arising out of the plaint, 
as, for instance, fraud, limitation, release, payment, performance, or facts showing 
illegality.  
3. It shall not be sufficient for a defendant in his written statement to deny generally the 
grounds alleged by the plaintiff, but the defendant must deal specifically with each 
allegation of fact of which he does not admit the truth, except damages.  
4. Where a defendant denies an allegation of fact in the plaint, he must not do so 
evasively, but a nswer the point of substance. Thus, if it is alleged that he received a 
certain sum of money, it shall not be sufficient to deny that he received that particular 
amount, but he must deny that he received that sum or any pay thereof, or else set but 
how muc h he received. And if an allegation is made with diverse circumstances, it shall 
not be sufficient to deny it along with those circumstances.  
5. Every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary 
implication, or stated to be  not admitted in the pleading of the defendant, shall be taken to 
be admitted except as against a person under disability:  
Provided that the Court may in its discretion require any fact so admitted to be proved 
otherwise than by such admission.  
6.-(1) Wher e in suit for the recovery of money the defendant claims to set -off against the 
plaintiff's demand any ascertained sum of money legally recoverable by him from the 
plaintiff, not exceeding the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, and both 

parties fill the same character as they fill in the plaintiff's suit, the defendant may, at the 
first hearing of the suit, but not afterwards unless permitted by the Court, present a 
written statement containing the particulars of the debt sought to be se -off. 
(2)The written statement shall have the same effect as a plaint in a cross -suit so as to 
enable the Court to pronounce a final judgement in respect both of the original claim and 
of the set -off: but this shall not effect the lien, upon he amount decreed,  of any pleader in 
respect of the costs payable to him under the decree.  
(3) The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant apply to a written statement in 
answer to a claim of set -off. 
Illustrations  
 
(a) A bequeaths Rs.2,000 to B and appoints C his executor and residuary legatee. B dies 
and D takes out administrations to B's effects. C pays Rs.1,000 as surety for D; then D 
sues C for the legacy. C cannot set -off the debt of Rs.1,000 against the legacy, for neither 
C nor D fills the same character  with respect to the legacy as they fill with respect to the 
payment of the Rs.1,000.  
(b) A dies intestate and in debt to B, C takes out administration to A's effects and B buys 
parts of the effects from C. In a suit for the purchase money by C against B, the latter 
cannot set -off the debt against the price, for C fills two different characters, one as the 
vendor to B, in which he sues B, and the other as representative to A.  
(c) A sues B on a bill of exchange. B alleges that A has wrongfully neglected to i nsure 
B's goods and is liable to him in compensation which he claims to set -off. The amount 
not being ascertained cannot be set -off. 
(d) A sues B on a bill of exchange for Rs.500 . B holds a judgment against A for 
Rs.1,000. The two claims being both defini te pecuniary demands may be set -off. 
(e) A sues B for compensation on account of trespass. B holds a promissory note for 
Rs.1,000 from A and claims to set -off that amount against any sum that A may recover in 
the suit. B may do so for as soon as A recovers  both sums as definite pecuniary demands.  
(f) A and B sue C for Rs.1,000 . C cannot set -off a debt due to him by A alone.  
(g) A sues B and C for Rs.1,000. B cannot set -off a debt due to him alone by A.  
(h) A with the partnership firm of B and C Rs.1000. B dies leaving C surviving. A sues C 
for a debt of Rs.1,500 due in his separate character. C may set -off the debt of Rs.1,000.  
7.Where the defendant relies upon several distinct grounds of defence or set -off founded 
upon separate and distinct facts, they sha ll be stated, as far as may be separately and 
distinctly.  
8. Any ground of defence which has arisen after the institution of the suit or the 
presentation of a written statement claiming a set -off may be raised by the defendant or 
plaintiff, as the case may  be in his written statement.  
9. No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a defendant other than by way of 
defence to a set -off shall be presented except by the leave of the Court and upon such 
terms as the Court thinks fit, but the Court may at any time require a written statement or 

additional written statement from any of the parties and fix a time for presenting the 
same.  
10. Where any party from whom a written statement is so required fails to present the 
same within the time fixed by Court, the Court may pronounce judgment against him, or 
make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit.  
[11. - (1) Every party, whether original, added or substituted, who appears in any suit or 
other proceeding, shall, on or before the date fixed in th e summons, notice or other 
process served on him, file in Court a proceeding stating his address for service.  
(2) Such address shall be entered in the Register of suits to be maintained under Order, 
IV rule 2.  
(3) Rules 20, 23, 24 and 25 of Order VII shall  apply, so far as may be, to addresses for 
service filed under this rule.  
12.-(1) Where a party fails to file address for service as provided in the preceding rule, he 
shall be liable to have his defence, if any, struck out and to be placed in the same pos ition 
as if he had not defended.  
(2) The Court may pass an order under sub -rule (1) suo motu or on the application of any 
party.  
13 - (1) In every suit of the nature referred to in rule 4, Order XXII, the written statement 
shall be accompanied by a stateme nt giving - 
a) the names and addresses of the persons who, in the event of the death of the defendant, 
may be made a party as his legal representatives;  
b) the name and address of the person, who in the event of the death of the defendant, 
shall intimate s uch fact to the Court, furnish the Court with the names, particulars and 
addresses of the legal representatives of the defendant and make an application for the 
legal representatives to be made a party.  
(2) A defendant may at any time - 
a) file in the Cour t an amended list of his presumptive representatives;  
b) nominate another person, in the place of the person nominated under clause (b) of sub -
rule (1) for the purposes of that clause.  
(3) A nomination made under clause (b) of sub -rule (1) shall, unless va ried under clause 
(b) of sub -rule (2), remain in force throughout the pendency of the suit and any 
proceedings arising therefrom, including appeal, revision of review.]  
ORDER IX  
APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCE OF NON -APPEARANCE  

1. On the day fixed in  the summons for the defendant to appear and answer, the parties 
shall be in attendance at the Court house in person or by their respective pleaders, and the 
suit shall then be heard unless the hearing is adjourned to a future dy fixed by the Court.  
2. Whe re on the day so fixed it is found that the summons has not been served upon the 
defendant in consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court -fee or postal 
charges (if any) chargeable for such service, the Court may make an order that the suit  be 
dismissed:  
Provided that no such order shall be made although the summons has not been served 
upon the defendant, if on the day fixed for him to appear and answer he attends in person 
or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent.  
3. Where neither party appears when the suit is called on for hearing, the Court may make 
an order that the suit be dismissed.  
4. Where a suit is dismissed under rule 2 or rule 3, the plaintiff may (subject to the law of 
limitation) bring a fresh suit; or he may apply for an order to set the dismissal aside, and 
if he satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cause for his not paying the court -fee and 
postal charges (if any) required within the time fixed before the issue of the summons, or 
for his non -appearance, as th e case may be, the Court shall make an order setting aside 
the dismissal and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
5.- [(1) Where after a summons has been issued to the defendant, or to one of several 
defendants, and returned unserved, the plai ntiff fails, for a period of three months from 
the date of the return made to the Court by the officer ordinarily certifying to the Court 
returns made by the serving officers, to apply for the issue of a fresh summons the Court 
shall make an order that the  suit be dismissed as against such defendant, unless the 
plaintiff has within the said period satisfied the Court that - 
a) he has failed after using his best endeavours to discover the residence of the defendant 
who has not been served, or  
b) such defenda nt is avoiding service of process, or  
c) there is any other sufficient cause for extending the time, in which case the Court may 
extend the time for making such application for such period as it thinks fit.  
(2) In such case the plaintiff may (subject to t he law of limitation) bring a fresh suit.  
6 - (1) Where the plaintiff appears and the defendant does not appear when the suit is 
called on for hearing, then - 
(a) if it is proved that the summons was duly served, the Court may proceed ex parte [and 
pass de cree without recording evidence].  
(b) If it is not proved that the summons was duly served the Court shall direct a second 
summons to be issued and served on the defendant;  
(c) If it is proved that the summons was served on the defendant, but not in suffic ient 
time to enable him to appear and answer on the day fixed in the summons, the Court shall 

postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day to be fixed by the Court and shall direct 
notice of such day to be given to the defendant.  
(2) Where it is owing to the plaintiff's default that the summons was not duly served or 
was not served in sufficient time, the Court shall order the plaintiff to pay the costs 
occasioned by the postponement.  
7. Where the Court has adjourned the hearing of the suit ex parte and  the defendant at or 
before such hearing, appears and assigns good cause for his previous non -appearance, he 
may upon such terms as the Court directs as to costs or otherwise be heard in answer to 
the suit as if he had appeared on the day fixed for his app earance.  
8. Where the defendant appears and the plaintiff does not appear when the suit is called 
on for hearing, the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed, unless the 
defendant admits the claim, or part thereof in which case the Court shall  pass a decree 
against the defendant upon such admission, and, where part only of the claim has been 
admitted, shall dismiss the suit so far as it relates to the remainder.  
9. - (1) Where a suit is wholly or partly dismissed under rule 8. the plaintiff sha ll be 
pecluded from bringing a fresh suit in respect of the same cause of action. But he may 
apply for an order to set the dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there was 
sufficient cause for his non -appearance when the suit was called on for  hearing, the Court 
shall make an order setting aside the dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as 
it thinks fit and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
(2) No order shall be made under this rule unless notice of the application has been 
served on the opposite party.  
[(3) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act 1908 (IX of 1908), shall apply to 
applications under sub -rule (1).]  
10. Where there are more plaintiffs than one and, one or more of them appear, and the 
others d o not appear, the Court may, at the instance of the plaintiff or plaintiffs appearing, 
permit the suit to proceed in the same way as if all the plaintiffs had appeared, or make 
such order as it thinks fit.  
11. Where there are more defendants than one and o ne or more of them appear and the 
others do not appear the suit shall proceed, and the Court shall a the time of pronouncing 
judgment make such order as it thinks fit with respect to the defendants who do not 
appear.  
12. Where a plaintiff or defendant who has been ordered to appear in person does not 
appear in person or show sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the Court for failing so to 
appear he shall be subject to all the provisions of the foregoing rules applicable to 
plaintiffs and defendants, resp ectively, who do not appear.  
Setting aside Decree Es parte  

13. [(1)] In any case in which a decree is passed ex parte against a defendant he may 
apply to the Court by which the decree was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he 
satisfies the Court t hat the summons was not duly served, or that he was prevented by any 
sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall 
make an order setting aside the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, 
payment into Co urt or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding 
with the suit:  
Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as against 
such defendant only it may be set aside as against all or any of the other de fendants also:  
[Provided further that no decree passed ex parte shall be set aside merely on the ground 
of any irregularity in the service of summons, if the Court is satisfied for reason to be 
accorded, that the defendant had knowledge of the date of hea ring in sufficient time to 
appear on that date and answer the claim].  
[(2) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act 1908 (X of 1908), shall apply to 
applications under sub -rule (1)].  
14. No decree shall be set aside on any such application as afor esaid unless notice thereof 
has been served on the opposite party.  
ORDER X  
EXAMINATIONS OF PARTIES BY THE COURT  
1. At the first hearing of the suit the Court shall ascertain from each party or his pleader 
whether he admits or denies such allegations of fac t as are made in the plaint or written 
statement (if any) of the opposite party, and as are not expressly or by necessary 
implication admitted or denied by the party against whom they are made. The Court shall 
record such admissions and denials.  
2. At the first hearing of the suit or at any subsequent hearing, any party appearing in 
person or present in Court or any person able to answer any material questions relating to 
the suit by whom such party or his pleader is accompanied[shall]be examined orally by 
the Court; and the Court may, if it thinks fit, pu in the course of such examination 
questions suggested by either party.  
3. The substance of the examination shall be reduced to writing by the Judge, and shall 
form part of the record.  
4.- (1) Where the ple ader of any party who appears by a pleader or any such person 
accompanying a pleader as is referred to in rule 2, refuses or is unable to answer any 
material question relating to the suit which the Court is of opinion that the party whom he 
represents ough t to answer, and is likely to be able to answer if interrogated in person, the 
Court may postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day and direct that such party shall 
appear in person on such day.  

(2) If such party fails without lawful excuse to appear  in person on the day so appointed, 
the Court may pronounce judgment against him, or make such order in relation to the suit 
as it thinks fit.  
 
ORDER XI  
DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION  
1. In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the Court may deliver i nterrogatories 
in writing for the examination of the opposite -parties or any one or more of such parties, 
and such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which 
of such interrogatories each of such persons is required t o answer: Provided that no party 
shall deliver more than one set of interrogatories to the same party without any order for 
that purpose: Provided also that interrogatories which do not relate to any matters in 
question in the suit shall be deemed irreleva nt, notwithstanding that they might be 
admissible on the oral cross -examination of a witness.  
2. On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the particular interrogatories 
proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the Court. In deciding up on such 
application, the Court shall take into account any offer, which may be made by the party 
sought to be interrogated to deliver particulars or to make admissions or to produce 
documents relating to the matters in question, or any of them, and leave s hall be given as 
to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the Court shall consider necessary either 
for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
3. In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be made into 
the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer 
or of the Court, either with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories 
have been exhibited unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper leng th, the costs 
occasioned by the said interrogatories and the answers thereto shall be paid in any event 
by the party in fault.  
4. Interrogatories shall be in Form No.2 in Appendix C with such variations as 
circumstances may require.  
5. Where any party to a  suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated 
or not, empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of 
any officer or other person, any opposite -party may apply for an order allowing him to 
deliver interroga tories to any member or officer of such corporation or body, and an order 
may be made accordingly.  
6. Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that it is scandalous or 
irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters 
inquired into are not sufficiently material at that stage, or on any other ground, may be 
taken in the affidavit in answer.  

7. Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that they have been exhibited 
unreasonably or vexatiously, or  struck out on the ground that they are prolix, oppressive, 
unnecessary or scandalous; and any application for this purpose may be made within 
seven days after service of the interrogatories.  
8. Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed wi thin ten days, or within 
such other time as the Court may allow.  
9. An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in Form No.3 in Appendix C, with 
such variations as circumstances may require.  
10. No exception shall be taken to any affidavit in answer , but the sufficiency or 
otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the 
Court.  
11. Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answers insufficiently, the party 
interrogating may apply to the Court for an order  requiring him to answer or to answer 
further, as the case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to answer or 
answer further, either by affidavit or by viva voce examination, as the Court may direct.  
12. Any party may, without filing any affidavit  apply to the Court for an order directing 
any other party to any suit to make discovery on oath of the documents which are or have 
been in his possession or power, relating to any matter in question therein. On the hearing 
of such application the Court ma y either refuse or adjourn the same, if satisfied that such 
discovery is not necessary, or not necessary at that stage of the suit, or make such order, 
either generally or limited to certain classes of documents, as may, in its discretion, be 
brought fit: Provided that discovery shall not be ordered when and so far as the Court 
shall be of opinion that it is not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for 
saving costs.  
13. The affidavit to be made by a party against whom such order as is mentio ned in the 
last preceding rule has been made shall specify which (if any) of the documents therein 
mentioned he objects to produce, and it shall be in Form No.5 in Appendix C with such 
variations as circumstances may require.  
14. It shall be lawful for the  Court at any time during the pendency of any suit, to order 
the production by any party thereto, upon oath, of such of the documents in his 
possession or power, relating to any matter in question in such suit, as the Court shall 
think right; and the Court  may deal with such documents, when produced, in such manner 
as shall appear just.  
15. Every party to a suit shall be entitled at any time to give notice to any other party, in 
whose pleadings or affidavits reference is made to any document, to produce suc h 
document for the inspection of the party giving such notice, or of his pleader, and to 
permit him or them to take copies thereof; and any party not complying with such notice 
shall not afterwards be at liberty to put any such document in evidence on his behalf in 

such suit unless he shall satisfy the Court that such document relates only to his own title, 
he being a defendant to the suit, or that he had some other cause or excuse which the 
Court shall deem sufficient for not complying with such notice, in  which the Court may 
allow the same to be put in evidence on such terms as to costs and otherwise as the Court 
shall think fit.  
16. Notice to any party to produce any documents referred to in his pleading or affidavits 
shall be in Form No.7 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require.  
17. The party to whom such notice is given shall, within ten days from the receipt of such 
notice, deliver to the party giving the same a notice stating a time within three days from 
the delivery thereof a  which the documents, or such of them as he does not object to 
produce, may be inspected at the office of his pleader, or in the case of bankers' books or 
other books of account or books in constant use for the purposes of any trade or business, 
at their u sual place of custody, and stating which (if any) of the documents he objects to 
produce, and on what ground. Such notice shall be in Form No.8 in Appendix C, with 
such variations as circumstances may require.  
18.-(1) Where the party served with notice und er rule 15 omits to give such notice of a 
time for inspection or objects to give inspection, or offers inspection elsewhere than at 
the office of his pleader, the Court may, on the application of the party desiring it make 
an order for inspection in such p lace and in such manner as it may think fit: Provided that 
the order shall not be made when and so far as the Court shall be of the opinion that it is 
not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
(2) Any application to inspect  documents, except such as are referred to in the pleadings, 
particulars or affidavits of the party against whom the application is made or disclosed in 
his affidavit of documents, shall be founded upon an affidavit showing of what 
documents inspection is sought, that the party applying is entitled to inspect them and 
that they are in the possession or power of the other party. The Court shall not make such 
order for inspection of such documents when and so far as the Court shall be of opinion 
that it is no t necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs.  
19 - (1) Where inspection of any business books is applied for the Court may, if it thinks 
fit, instead of ordering inspection of the original books, order a copy of any entries 
there in to be furnished and verified by the affidavit of some person who has examined the 
copy with the original entries, and such affidavit shall state whether or not there are in the 
original book any and what erasures, interlineations or alterations; Provide d that, 
notwithstanding that such copy has been supplied the Court may order inspection of the 
book from which the copy was made.  
(2) Where on an application for an order for inspection privilege is claimed for any 
document it shall be lawful for the Court  to inspect the document for the purpose of 
deciding as to the validity of the claim of privilege.  

(3) The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit at any time, and whether an 
affidavit of documents shall or shall not have already been ordered or made, make an 
order requiring any other party to state by affidavit whether any one or more specific 
documents, to be specified in the application, is or are, or has or have at any time been in 
his possession or power, and, if not then in his possession , when he parted with the same 
and what has become thereof. Such application shall be made on an affidavit stated that 
in the belief of the deponent the party against whom the application is made has, or has at 
sometime had, in his possession or power the document or documents specified I the 
application, and that they relate to the matters in question in the suit, or to some of them.  
20. Where the party from whom discovery of any kind or inspection is sought objects to 
the same, or any part thereof, the Co urt may, if satisfied that the right to the discovery or 
inspection sought depends on the determination of any issue or question in dispute in the 
suit, or that for any other reason it is desirable that any issue or question in dispute in the 
suit should b e determined before deciding upon the right to the discovery or inspection, 
order that such issue or question be determined first, and reserve the question as to the 
discovery or inspection.  
21. Where any party fails to comply with any order to answer inte rrogatories, or for 
discovery or inspection of documents he shall, if a plaintiff, be liable to have his suit 
dismissed for want of prosecution, and, if a defendant, to have his defend, if any, struck 
out, and to be placed in the same position as if he had  not defended, and the party 
interrogating or seeking discovery or inspection may apply to the Court for an order to 
that effect and an order may be made accordingly.  
 
22. Any party may, at the trial of a suit, use in evidence any one or more of the answer s 
or any part of an answer of the opposite -party to interrogatories without putting in the 
others or the whole of such answer: Provided always that in such case the Court may look 
at the whole of the answers, and if it shall be of opinion that any others o f them are so 
connected with those put in that the last -mentioned answers ought not to be used without 
them, it may direct them to be put in.  
23. This order shall apply to minor plaintiffs and defendants, and to the next friends and 
guardians for the suit of persons under disability.  
ORDER XII  
ADMISSIONS  
1. Any party to a suit may give notice, by his pleading or otherwise in writing, that he 
admits the truth of the whole or any part of the case of any other party.  
2. Either party may call upon the other par ty to admit any document, saving all just 
exceptions; and in case of refusal or neglect to admit, after such notice, the costs of 
proving any such document shall be paid by the party so neglecting or refusing, whatever 

the result of the suit may be, unless  the Court otherwise directs; and no costs of proving 
any document shall be allowed unless such notice is given, except where the omission to 
give the notice is in the opinion of the Court a saving of expense.  
3. A notice to admit documents shall be in For m No.9 in Appendix C, with such 
variations as circumstances may require.  
4. Any party may, by notice in writing, at any time not later than nine days before the day 
fixed for the hearing, call on any other party to admit, for the purposes of the suit only,  
any specific fact or facts mentioned in such notice. And in case of refusal or neglect to 
admit the same within six days after service of such notice, or within such further time as 
may be allowed by the Court, the costs of proving such fact or facts shal l be paid by the 
party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the suit may be unless the Court 
otherwise directs: Provided that any admission made in pursuance of such notice is to be 
deemed to be made only for the purposes of the particular sui t, and not as an admission to 
be used against the party on any other occasion or in favour of any person other than the 
party giving the notice: Provided also that the Court may at any time allow any party to 
amend or withdraw any admission so made on such  terms as may be just.  
5. A notice to admit facts shall be in Form No.10 in Appendix C and admissions of facts 
shall be in Form No.11 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may 
require.  
6. Any party may, at any stage of a suit, where admissio ns of fact have been made, either 
on the pleadings, or otherwise, apply to the Court for such judgment or order as upon 
such admissions he may be entitled to, without waiting for the determination of any other 
question between the parties: and the Court ma y upon such application make such order, 
or give such judgment as the Court may think just.  
7. An affidavit of the pleader or his clerk, of the due signature of any admissions made in 
pursuance of any notice to admit documents of facts, shall be sufficient  evidence of such 
admissions, if evidence thereof is required.  
8. Notice to produce documents shall be in Form No.12 in Appendix C with such 
variations as circumstances may require. An affidavit of the pleader, or his clerk, of the 
service of any notice to  produce, and of the time when it was served, with a copy of the 
notice to produce, shall in all cases be sufficient evidence of the service of the notice, and 
of the time when it was served  
9. If a notice to admit or produce specifies documents which are  not necessary the costs 
occasioned thereby shall be borne by the party giving such notice.  
 
ORDER XIII  
PRODUCTION, IMPOUNDING AND RETURN OF DOCUMENTS  

1. - (1) The parties or their pleaders shall produce, at the first hearing of the suit, all the 
documenta ry evidence of every description in their possession or power, on which they 
intend to rely, and which has not already been filed in Court, and all documents which the 
Court has ordered to be produced.  
(2) The Court shall receive the documents so produced:  Provided that they are 
accompanied by an accurate list thereof prepared in such form as the High Court directs.  
[(3) On production of documents under this rule, the Cour may call upon the parties to 
admit or deny the documents produced in the Court and re cord their admission or, as the 
case may be denial].  
2. No documentary evidence in the possession or power of any party which should have 
been but has not been produced in accordance with the requirements of rule 1 shall be 
received at any subsequent stage  of the proceedings unless good cause is shown to the 
satisfaction of the Court for the non -production thereof; and the Court receiving any such 
evidence shall record the reasons for so doing.  
3. The Court may at any stage of the suit reject any document w hich it considers 
irrelevant or otherwise inadmissible, recording the ground of such rejection.  
4.-(1) Subject to the provisions of the next following sub -rule there shall be endorsed on 
every document which has been admitted in evidence in the suit the fo llowing particulars 
namely: - 
a) the number and title of the suit,  
b) the name of the person producing the document,  
c) the date on which it was produced, and  
d) a statement of its having been so admitted;  
and the endorsement shall be signed or initialled b y the judge.  
(2) Where a document so admitted is an entry in a book, account or record, and a copy 
thereof has been substituted for the original under the next following rule, the particulars 
aforesaid shall be endorsed on the copy and the endorsement ther eon shall be signed or 
initialled by the Judge.  
5-(1) Save in so far as is otherwise provided by the Banker's Books Evidence Act, 1891, 
where a document admitted in evidence in the suit is an entry in a letter -book or a shop -
book or other account in curren t use, the party on whose behalf the book or account is 
produced may furnish a copy of the entry.  
(2) Where such a document is an entry in a public record produced from a public office, 
or by a public officer, or an entry in a book or account belonging to a person other than a 
party on whose behalf the book or account is produced, the Court may require a copy of 
the entry to be furnished - 
(a) where the record, book or account is produced on behalf of a party, then by that party, 
or 

(b) where the record, bo ok or account is produced in obedience to an order of the Court 
acting of its own motion, then by either or any party.  
(3) Where a copy of an entry is furnished under the foregoing provisions of this rule, the 
Court shall, after causing the copy to be exam ined, compared and certified in manner 
mentioned in rule 17 of Order VII, mark the entry and cause he book, account or record 
in which it occurs to be returned to the person producing it.  
6. Where a document relied on as evidence by either party is conside red by the Court to 
be inadmissible in evidence, there shall be endorsed thereon the particulars mentioned in 
clauses (a), (b) and (c) of rule 4, sub -rule (1) together with a statement of its having been 
rejected, and the endorsement shall be signed or ini tialled by the Judge.  
7.-(1) Every document which has been admitted in evidence or a copy thereof where a 
copy has been substituted for the original under rule 5, shall form part of the record of the 
suit. 
(2) Documents not admitted in evidence shall not f orm part of the record and shall be 
returned to the persons respectively producing them.  
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 5 or rule 7 of this Order or in rule 17 of 
Order VII, the Court may, if it sees sufficient cause, direct any document or book 
produced before it in any suit to be impounded and kept in the custody of an officer of the 
Court for such period and subject to such conditions as the Court thinks fit.  
9.-(1) Any person, whether a party to the suit or not, desirous of receiving back  any 
document produced by him in the suit and placed on the record shall, unless the 
document is impounded under rule 8, be entitled to receive back the same, - 
(a) where the suit is one in which an appeal is not allowed, when the suit has been 
disposed of,  and  
(b) where the suit is one in which an appeal is allowed when the Court is satisfied that the 
time for preferring an appeal has elapsed and that no appeal has been preferred or, if an 
appeal has been preferred, when the appeal has been disposed of:  
Provided that a document may be returned at any time earlier than that prescribed by this 
rule if the person applying therefor delivers to the proper officer a certified copy to the 
substituted for the original and undertakes to produce the original if requi red to do so:  
Provided also that no document shall be returned which, by for ce of the decree, has 
become wholly void or useless.  
(2) On the return of a document admitted in evidence, a receipt shall be given by the 
person receiving it.  

10.-(1) The Court m ay of its own motion, and may in its discretion upon the application 
of any of the parties to a suit, send for, either from its own records or from any other 
Court, the record of any other suit or proceeding, and inspect the same.  
(2) Every application mad e under this rule shall (unless the Court otherwise directs) be 
supported by an affidavit showing how the record is material to the suit in which the 
application is made, and that the applicant cannot without unreasonable delay or expense 
obtain a duly aut henticated copy of the record or of such portion thereof as the applicant 
requires, or that the production of the original is necessary for the purposes of justice.  
(3) Nothing contained in this rule shall be deemed to enable the Court to use in evidence 
any document which under the law of evidence would be inadmissible in the suit.  
10. The provisions herein contained, as to documents shall, so far as may be, apply to all 
other material objects producible as evidence.  
 
ORDER XIV  
SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES AND DET ERMINATION OF SUIT ON  
ISSUES OF LAW OR ON ISSUES AGREED UPON  
1.-(1) Issues arise when a material proposition of fact or law is affirmed by the one party 
and denied by the other.  
(2) Material propositions are those propositions of law or fact which a plaint iff must 
allege in order to show a right to sue or a defendant must allege in order to constitute his 
defence.  
(3)Each material proposition affirmed by one party and denied by the other shall form the 
subject of a distinct issue.  
(4) Issues are of two kind s : (a) issues of fact, (b) issues of law.  
(5) At the first hearing of the suit the Court shall, after reading the plaint and the written 
statements, if any, and after such examination of the parties as may appear necessary, 
ascertain upon what material pr opositions of fact or of law the parties are at variance, and 
shall thereupon proceed to frame and record the issues on which the right decision of the 
case appears to depend.  
(6) Nothing in this rule requires the Court to frame and record issues where the  defendant 
at the first hearing of the suit makes no defence.  
2. Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit, and the Court is of opinion 
that the case or any part thereof may be disposed of on the issues of law only, it shall try 

those iss ues first, and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the 
issues of fact until after the issues of law have been determined.  
3. The Court may frame the issues from all or any of the following materials - 
(a) allegations made on o ath by the parties, or by any persons present on their behalf, or 
made by the pleaders of such parties;  
(b) allegations made in the pleadings or in answers to interrogatories delivered in the suit;  
(c) the contents of documents produced by the either party . 
4. Where the Court is of opinion that the issues cannot be correctly framed without the 
examination of some person not before the Court or without the inspection of some 
document not produced in the suit, it may adjourn the framing of the issues to a fut ure 
day, and may (subject to any law for the time being in force) compel the attendance of 
any person or the production of any document by the person in whose possession or 
power it is by summons or other process.  
5-(1) The Court may at any time before pas sing a decree amend the issues or frame 
additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit,. And all such amendments or additional 
issues as may be necessary for determining the matters in controversy between the parties 
shall be so made or framed.  
(2) The C ourt may also, at any time before passing a decree, strike out any issues that 
appear to it to be wrongly framed or introduced.  
6. Where the parties to a suit are agreed as to the question of fact or of law to be decided 
between them, they may state the sa me in the form of an issue, and enter, into an 
agreement in writing that, upon the finding of the Court in the affirmative or the negative 
of such issue - 
(a) a sum of money specified in the agreement or to be ascertained by the Court, or in 
such manner as the Court may direct, shall be paid by one of the parties to the other of 
them, or that one of them be declared entitled to some right or subject to some liability 
specified in the agreement;  
(b) some property specified in the agreement and in dispute in t he suit shall be delivered 
by one of the parties to the other of them, or as that other may direct; or  
(c) one or more of the parties shall do or abstain from doing some particular act specified 
in the agreement and relating to the matter in dispute.  
7. Wh ere the Court is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it deems proper - 
(a) that the agreement was duly executed by the parties;  
(b) that they have a substantial interest in the decision of such question as aforesaid, and  
(c) that the same is fit to be tried and decided,  

it shall proceed to record and try the issue and state its finding or decision thereon in the 
same manner as if the issue had been framed by the Court;  
and shall, upon the finding or decision on such issue, pronounce judgement according to 
the terms of the agreement; and, upon the judgment so pronounced, a decree shall follow.  
 
ORDER XV  
DISPOSAL OF THE SUIT AT THE FIRST HEARING  
1. Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the parties are not at issue on any 
question of law or o f fact, the Court may at once pronounce judgment.  
2. Where there are more defendants than one, and any one of the defendants is not at 
issue with the plaintiff on any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once 
pronounce judgment for or against such defendant and the suit shall proceed only against 
the other defendants.  
3-(1) Where the parties are at issue on some question of law or of fact, and issues have 
been framed by the Court as hereinbefore provided, if the Court is satisfied that no further 
argument or evidence than the parties can at once adduce is required upon such of the 
issues as may be sufficient for the decision of the suit, and that no injustice will result 
from proceeding with the suit forthwith, the Court may proceed to determine such  issues, 
and if the finding thereon is sufficient for the decision, may pronounce judgment 
accordingly, whether the summons has been issued for the settlement of issues only or for 
the final disposal of the suit:  
Provided that, where the summons has been i ssued for the settlement of issues only, the 
parties or their pleaders are present and none of them objects.  
(2) Where the finding is not sufficient for the decision, the Court shall postpone the 
further hearing of the suit, and shall fix a day for the pro duction of such further evidence, 
or for such further argument as the case requires.  
4. Where the summons has been issued for the final disposal of the suit and either party 
fails without sufficient cause to produce the evidence on which he relies, the Cou rt may 
at once pronounce judgment or may, if it thinks fit, after framing and recording issues 
adjourn the suit for the production of such evidence as may be necessary for its decision 
upon such issues.  
ORDER XVI  
SUMMONING AND ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES  

[1 - (1) Not later than seven days after the settlement of issues, the parties shall present in 
Court a [certificate of readiness to produce evidence alongwith a] list of witnesses whom 
they propose to cal either to give evidence or to produce documents.  
(2) A party shall not be permitted to call witnesses other than those contained in the said 
list, except with the permission of the Court and after showing good cause for the 
omission of permission, it shall record reasons for so doing.  
(3) On application to the  Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, the parties 
may obtain summons for persons whose attendance is required in Court:  
Provided that no summons shall be issued for service on a person under rule 8 unless an 
application in that behalf is ma de not later than fourteen days prior to the date fixed for 
the hearing of the suit and the necessary expenses for the summoning of such person are 
deposited].  
2.-(1) The party applying for a summons shall, before the summons is granted and within 
a period  to be fixed, pay into Court such a sum of money as appears to the Court to be 
sufficient to defray the travelling and other expenses of the person summoned in passing 
to and from the Court in which he is required to attend, and for one day's attendance.  
 
(2) In determining the amount payable under this rule, the Court may, in the case of any 
person summoned to give evidence as an expert, allow reasonable remuneration for the 
time occupied both in giving evidence and in performing any work of an expert char acter 
necessary for the case.  
(3)Where the Court is subordinate to a High Court, regard shall be had, in fixing the scale 
of such expenses, to any rules made in that behalf.  
3. The sum so paid into Court shall be tendered to the person summoned, at the tim e of 
serving the summons, if it can be served personally.  
4-(1) Where it appears to the Court or to such officer as it appoints in this behalf that the 
sum paid into Court is not sufficient to cover such expenses or reasonable remuneration, 
the Court may d irect such further sum to be paid to the person summoned as appears to 
be necessary on that account, and in case of default in payment, may order such sum to 
be levied by attachment and sale of the movable property of the party obtaining the 
summons; or th e Court may discharge the person summoned, without requiring him to 
give evidence; or may both order such levy and discharge such person as aforesaid.  
(2) Where it is necessary to detain the person summoned for a longer period than one 
day, the Court may, from time to time, order the party at whose instance he was 
summoned to pay into Court such sum as is sufficient to defray the expenses of his 
detention for such further period, and in default of such deposit being made, may order 
such sum to be levied by attachment and sale of the movable property of such party; or 

the Court may discharge the person summoned without requiring him to give evidence; 
or may both order such levy and discharge such person as aforesaid.  
5. Every summons for the attendance of a p erson to give evidence or to produce a 
document shall specify the time and place at which he is required to attend, and also 
whether his attendance is required for the purpose of giving evidence or to produce a 
document, or for both purposes; and any parti cular document which the person 
summoned is called on to produce, shall be described in the summons with reasonable 
accuracy.  
6. Any person may be summoned to produce a document, without being summoned to 
give evidence ; and any person summoned merely to p roduce a document shall be 
deemed to have complied with the summons if he causes such document to be produced 
instead of attending personally to produce the same.  
7. Any person present in Court may be required by the Court to give evidence or to 
produce an y document then and there in his possession or power.  
[7-A.-(1) Except where it appears to the Court that a summons under this Order should be 
served by the Court in the same manner as a summons to a defendant, the Court shall 
make over for service all sum mons under this Order to the party applying therefor.  
(2) The service shall be effected by or on behalf of such party by delivering or tendering 
to the witness in person a copy thereof signed by the Judge or such officer as he appoints 
in this behalf and sealed with the seal of the Court.  
(3) Rules 16 and 18 of Order V shall apply to summons personally served under this rule, 
as though the person effecting service were a serving officer].  
[8. Every summons under this Order, not being a summons made over to  a party for 
service under rule 7 -A of this Order, shall be served as nearly as may be in the same 
manner as a summons to a defendant, and the rules in Order V as to proof of service shall 
apply thereto].  
9. Service shall in all cases be made a sufficient time before the time specified in the 
summons for the attendance of the person summoned, to allow him a reasonable time for 
preparation and for travelling to the place at which his attendance is required.  
10-(1) Where a person to whom a summons has been i ssued either to attend to give 
evidence or to produce a document fails to attend or to produce the document in 
compliance with such summons, the Court shall, if the certificate of the serving -officer 
has not been verified by affidavit, and may, if it has b een so verified, examine the 
serving -officer on oath, or cause him to be so examined by another Court, touching the 
service or non -service of the summons.  
(2) Where the Court sees reason to believe that such evidence or production is material 
and that such  person has without lawful excuse, failed to attend or to produce the 
document in compliance with such summons or has intentionally avoided service, it may 
issue a proclamation requiring him to attend to give evidence or to produce the document 

at a time a nd place to be named therein; and a copy of such proclamation shall be affixed 
on the outer door or other conspicuous part of the house in which he ordinarily resides.  
(3) In lieu of or at the time of issuing such proclamation or at any time afterwards,. T he 
Court may, in its discretion, issue a warrant either with or without bail, for the arrest of 
such person, and may make an order for the attachment of his property to such amount as 
it thinks fit, not exceeding the amount of the costs of attachment and o f any fine which 
may be imposed under rule 12:  
Provided that no Court of Small Causes shall make an order for the attachment of 
immovable property.  
11. Where, at any time after the attachment of his property, such person appears and 
satisfies the Court, - 
(a) that he did not, without lawful excuse, fail to comply with the summons or 
intentionally avoid service, and  
(b) where he has failed to attend at the time and place named in a proclamation issued 
under the last preceding rule, that he had no notice of su ch proclamation in time to attend,  
the Court shall direct that the property be released from attachment and shall make such 
order as to the costs of the attachment as it thinks fit.  
12. The Court may, where such person does not appear, or appears but fails  so to satisfy 
the Court, impose upon him such fine not exceeding [two thousand]rupees as it thinks fit, 
having regard to his condition in life and all the circumstances of the case, and may order 
his property, or any part thereof, to be attached and sold or, if already attached under rule 
10, to be sold for the purpose of satisfying all costs of such attachment, together with the 
amount of the said fine, if any:  
Provided that, if the person whose attendance is required pays into Court the costs and 
fine af oresaid, the Court shall order the property to be released from attachment.  
13. The provisions with regard to the attachment and sale of property in the execution of 
a decree shall, so far as they are applicable be deemed to apply to any attachment and sal e 
under this Order as if the person whose property is so attached were a judgment -debtor.  
14. Subject to the provisions of this Court as to attendance and appearance and to any law 
for the time being in force, where the Court at any time thinks it is neces sary to examine 
any person other than a party to the suit and not called as a witness by a party to the suit, 
the Court may, of its own motion, cause such person to be summoned as a witness to give 
evidence, or to produce any document in his possession, on  a day to be appointed and 
may examine him as a witness or require him to produce such document.  
15. Subject as last aforesaid whoever is summoned to appear and give evidence in a suit 
shall attend at the time and place named in the summons for that purpos e, and whoever is 
summoned to produce a document shall either attend to produce it, or cause it to be 
produced, at such time and place.  

16 - (1) A person so summoned and attending shall unless the Court otherwise directs 
attend at each hearing until the su it has been disposed of.  
(2) On the application of either party and the payment through the Churt of all necessary 
expenses (if any), the Court may require any person so summoned and attending to 
furnish security to attend at the next or any other hearing or until the suit is disposed of 
and, in default of his furnishing such security, may order him to be detained in the civil 
prison.  
17. The provisions of rules 10 to 13 shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to 
apply to any person who having atten ded in compliance with a summons departs, without 
lawful excuse, in contravention of rule 16.  
18. Where any person arrested under a warrant is brought before the Court in custody and 
cannot, owing to the absence of the parties or any of them, give the evid ence or produce 
the document which he has been summoned to give or produce, the Court may require 
him to give reasonable bail or other security for his appearance at such time and place as 
it thinks fit, and, on such bail or security being given, may relea se him, and, in default of 
his giving such bail or security, may order him to be detained in the civil prison.  
[19. A person shall not be asked by a Court to attend in person to give evidence unless he 
resides at any place in Pakistan].  
20. Where any party  to a suit present in Court refuses, without lawful excuse, when 
required by the Court, to give evidence or to produce any document then and therein his 
possession or power, the Court may pronounce judgment against him or make such order 
in relation to the  suit as it thinks fit.  
21. Where any party to a suit is required to give evidence or to produce a document, the 
provisions as to witnesses shall apply to him so far as they are applicable.  
 
ORDER XVII  
ADJOURNMENTS  
1.-(1) The Court may, if sufficient cause  is shown at any stage of the suit grant time to the 
parties or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the hearing of the suit.  
(2) In every such case the Court shall fix a day for the further hearing of the suit, and may 
make such order as it t hinks fit with respect to the costs occasioned by the adjournment:  
Provided that, when the hearing of evidence has once begun, the hearing of the suit shall 
be continued from day to day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, 
unless the C ourt finds the adjournment of the hearing beyond the following day to be 
necessary for reasons to be recorded.  

2. Where, on any day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the parties or any of 
them fail to appear, the Court may proceed to dispose o f the suit in one of the modes 
directed in that behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit.  
3. Where any party to a suit to whom time has been granted fails to produce his evidence, 
or to cause the attendance of his witnesses, or to perf orm any other act necessary to the 
further progress of the suit, for which time has been allowed, the Court may, 
notwithstanding each default, proceed to decide the suit forthwith.  
[4. Where a suit or proceeding is set down for a day which is a holiday, th e parties thereto 
shall appear in the Court on the day next following that day, or, when two or more 
successive days are holidays, on the day next following the last of such successive days, 
and the Court may then either proceed with the suit on such day, or fix some other day 
thereafter.]  
[5. When on day the presiding officer of the Court is absent by reason of illness or any 
other cause, the parties to the suit or proceeding set down for that day(notwithstanding 
the knowledge that the presiding officer wo uld be absent) shall appear in the Court in the 
|Courthouse on that day and the ministerial officer of the Court authorized in that behalf 
shall hand over to the parties slips of paper specifying the other date fixed for proceeding 
with the suit or proceed ing and signed by him].  
ORDER XVIII  
HEARING OF THE SUIT AND EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES  
 
1. The plaintiff has the right to begin unless the defendant admits the facts alleged by the 
plaintiff and contends that either in point of law or on some additional fact s alleged by 
the defendant the plaintiff is not entitled to any part of the relief which he seeks, in which 
case the defendant has the right to begin.  
2-(1) On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit or on any other day to which the hearing 
is adjourned,  the party having the right to begin shall state his case and produce his 
evidence in support of the issues which he is bound to prove.  
(2) The other party shall then state his case and produce his evidence (if any) and may 
then address the Court generally  on the whole case.  
(3)The party beginning may then reply generally on the whole case.  
3. Where there are several issues, the burden of proving some of which lies on the other 
party the party beginning may, at his option, either produce his evidence on tho se issues 
or reserve it by way of answer to the evidence produced by the other party; and in the 
latter case, the party beginning may produce evidence on those issues after the other party 
has produced all his evidence, and the other party may then reply s pecially on the 

evidence so produced by the party beginning; but the party beginning will then be entitled 
to reply generally on the whole case.  
4. The evidence of the witnesses in attendance shall be taken orally in open Court in the 
presence and under th e personal direction and superintendence of the Judge.  
5. In cases in which an appeal is allowed the evidence of each witness shall be taken 
down in writing, in the language of the Court, by or in the presence and under the 
personal direction and superinte ndence of the Judge, not ordinarily in the form of 
question and answer, but in that of a narrative, and, when completed, shall be read over in 
the presence of the Judge and of the witness, and the Judge shall, if necessary, correct the 
same, and shall sign  it. 
6. Where the evidence is taken down in a language different from that in which it is 
given, and the witness does not understand the language in which it is taken down, the 
evidence as taken down in writing shall be interpreted to him in the language i n which it 
is given.  
7. Evidence taken down under section 138 shall be in the form prescribed by rule 5 and 
shall be read over and signed and, as occasion may require, interpreted and corrected as if 
it were evidence taken down under that rule.  
8. Where th e evidence is not taken down in writing by the Judge, he shall be bound, as 
the examination of each witness proceeds, to make a memorandum of the substance of 
what each witness deposes, and such memorandum shall be written and signed by the 
Judge and shall  form part of the record.  
9. Where English is not the language of the Court, but all the parties to the suit who 
appear in person, and the pleaders of such as appear by pleaders, do not object to have 
such evidence as is given in English taken down in Engl ish, the Judge may so take it 
down.  
10. The Court may, of its own motion or on the application of any party or his pleader, 
take down any particular question and answer, or any objection to any question, if there 
appears to be any special reason for so doi ng. 
11. Where any question put to a witness is objected to by a party or his pleader, and the 
Court allows the same to be put, the Judge shall take down the question the answer, the 
objection and the name of the person making it, together with the decision  of the Court 
thereon.  
12. The Court may record such remarks as it thinks material respecting the demeanor of 
any witness while under examination.  
13. In cases in which an appeal is not allowed, it shall not be necessary to take down the 
evidence of the wi tnesses in writing at length; but the Judge, as the examination of each 

witness proceeds, shall make a memorandum of the substance of what he deposes, and 
such memorandum shall be written and signed by the Judge and shall form part of the 
record.  
14.-(1) W here the Judge is unable to make a memorandum as required by this Order, he 
shall cause the reason of such inability to be recorded, and shall cause the memorandum 
to be made in writing from his dictation in open Court.  
(2) Every memorandum so made shall f orm part of the record.  
15-(1) Where a Judge is prevented by death, transfer or other cause from concluding the 
trial of a suit, his successor may deal with any evidence or memorandum taken down or 
made under the foregoing rules as if such evidence or memo randum had been taken down 
or made by him or under his direction under the said rules and may proceed with the suit 
from the stage at which his predecessor left it.  
(2) The provisions of sub -rule (1) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply  
to evidence taken in a suit transferred under section 24.  
16-(1) Where a witness is about to leave the jurisdiction of the Court, or other sufficient 
cause is shown to the satisfaction of the Court why his evidence should be taken 
immediately, the Court m ay, upon the application of any party or of the witness, at any 
time after the institution of the suit, take the evidence of such witness in manner 
hereinbefore provided.  
(2) Where such evidence is not taken forthwith and in the presence of the parties, su ch 
notice as the Court thinks sufficient, of the day fixed for the examination, shall be given 
to the parties.  
(3) The evidence so taken shall be read over to the witness, and, if he admits it to be 
correct, shall be signed by him, and the Judge shall, if necessary, correct the same, and 
shall sign it, and it may then be read at any hearing of the suit.  
17. The Court may at any stage of a suit recall any witness who has been examined and 
may (subject to the law of evidence for the time being in force) put s uch questions to him 
as the Court thinks fit.  
18. The Court may at any stage of a suit inspect any property or thing concerning which 
any question may arise.  
ORDER XIX  
AFFIDAVITS  
1. Any Court may at any time for sufficient reason order that any particular fact or facts 
may be proved by affidavit, or that the affidavit of any witness may be read at the 
hearing, on such conditions as the Court thinks reasonable:  

Provided that where it appears to the Court that either party bona fide desires the 
production of a witness for cross -examination, and that such witness can be produced, an 
order shall not be made authorizing the evidence of such witness to be given by affidavit.  
2-(1) Upon any application evidence may be given by affidavit, but the Court may, at the 
instance of either party, order the attendance for cross -examination of the deponent.  
(2) Such attendance shall be in Court, unless the deponent is exempted from personal 
appearance in Court, or the Court otherwise directs.  
3.(1) Affidavits shall be confine d to such facts as the deponent is able of his own 
knowledge to prove, except on interlocutory applications, on which statements of his 
belief may be admitted; provided that the grounds thereof are stated.  
(2) The cost of every affidavit which shall unnece ssarily set forth matter of hearsay or 
argumentative matter, or copies of or extracts from documents, shall (unless the Court 
otherwise directs) be paid by the party filing the same.  
ORDER XX  
JUDGMENT AND DECREE  
[1 (1) On completion of evidence, the Court,  shall fix a date,. Not exceeding fifteen days, 
for hearing of arguments of parties.  
(2) The Court shall, after the case has been heard, pronounce judgment in open Court, 
either at once or on some future day not exceeding thirty days, for which due notice shall 
be given to the parties or their advocates].  
2. A Judge may pronounce a judgment written but not pronounced by his predecessor.  
3. The judgment shall be dated and signed by the Judge in open Court at the time of 
pronouncing it and, when once signed, shall not afterwards be altered or added to save as 
provided by section 152 or on review,  
4.(1) Judgements of a Court of Small Causes need not contain more than the points for 
determination and the decision thereon.  
(2) Judgements of other Courts shall con tain a concise statement of the case, the points 
for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for such decision.  
5. In suits in which issues have been framed, the Court shall state its finding or decision, 
with the reasons therefor, upon each s eparate issue, unless the finding upon any one or 
more of the issues is sufficient for the decision of the suit.  
6.-(1) The decree shall agree with the judgement; it shall contain the number of the suit, 
the names and descriptions of the parties, and parti culars of the claim, and shall specify 
clearly the relief granted or other determination of the suit.  

(2) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the suit, and by whom or 
out of what property and in what proportions such costs are to be  paid.  
(3) The Court may direct that the costs payable to one party by the other shall be set -off 
against any sum which is admitted or found to be due from the former to the latter.  
7. The decree shall bear date the day on which the judgement was pronounce d, and, when 
the Judge has satisfied himself that the decree has been drawn up in accordance with the 
judgement, he shall sign the decree  
8. Where a Judge has vacated office after pronouncing judgement but without signing the 
decree a decree drawn up in ac cordance with such judgement may be signed by his 
successor or, if the Court has ceased to exist, by the Judge of any Court to which such 
Court was subordinate.  
9. Where the subject -mater of the suit is immovable property, the decree shall contain a 
descri ption of such property sufficient to identify the same, and where such property can 
be identified by boundaries or by numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the decree 
shall specify such boundaries or numbers.  
10. Where the suit is for movable proper ty, and the decree is for the delivery of such 
property, the decree shall also state the amount of money to be paid as an alternative if 
delivery cannot be had.  
11.-(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the Court may for 
any suff icient reason at the time of passing the decree order that payment of the amount 
decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by installments, with or without interest, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the contract under which the money is payable.  
(2) After the passing of any such decree the Court may, on the application of the 
judgment -debtor and with the consent of the decree -holders, order that payment of the 
amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by installments on such terms as to 
the payment of interest, the attachment of the property of the judgment -debtor, or the 
taking of security from him, or otherwise, as it thinks fit.  
12-(1) Where a suit is for the recovery of possession of immovable property and for rent 
or mesne profits, the Court may pass a decree - 
a) for the possession of the property;  
b) for the rent or mesne profits, which have accrued on the property during a period prior 
to the institution of the suit or directing an inquiry as to such rent or mesne profits;  
c) directing  an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits from the institution of the suit until - 
i. the delivery of possession to the decree -holder;  
ii. the relinquishment of possession by the judgement -debtor with notice to the decree -

holder through the Court; or  
iii. the  expiration of three years from the date of the decree whichever event first occurs.  
(2) Where an inquiry is directed under clause(b) or clause (c), a final decree in respect of 
the rent or mesne profits shall be passed in accordance with the result of suc h inquiry.  
13.-(1) Where a suit is for an account of any property and for its due administration under 
the decree of the Court, the Court shall, before passing the final decree, pass a 
preliminary decree, ordering such accounts and inquiries to be taken an d made, and 
giving such other directions as it thinks fit.  
(2) In the administration by the Court of the property of any deceased person, if such 
property proves to be insufficient for the payment in full of his debts and liabilities, the 
same rules shall be observed as to the respective rights of secured and unsecured creditors 
and as to debts and liabilities provable and as to the valuation of annuities and future and 
contingent liabilities respectively, as may be in force for the time being, within the l ocal 
limits of the Court in which the administration suit is pending with respect to the estates 
of persons adjudged or declared insolvent; and all persons who in any such case would be 
entitled to be paid out of such property, may come in under the prelim inary decree, and 
make such claims against the same as they may respectively be entitled to by virtue of 
this Code.  
14-(1) Where the Court decrees a claim to pre -emption in respect of a particular sale of 
property and the purchase -money has not been paid i nto Court the decree shall - 
a) specify a day on or before which the purchase -money shall be so paid, and  
b) direct that on payment into Court of such purchase -money, together with the costs(if 
any) decreed against the plaintiff, on or before the day referr ed to in clause(a), the 
defendant shall deliver possession of the property to the plaintiff, whose title thereto shall 
be deemed to have accrued from the date of such payment, but that, if the purchase -
money and the costs (if any) are not so paid the suit shall be dismissed with costs.  
(2) Where the Court has adjudicated upon rival claims to pre -emption, the decree shall 
direct, - 
a) If and in so far as the claims decreed are equal in decree that the claim of each pre -
emptor complying with the provisions of sub-rule (1) shall take effect in respect of a 
proportionate share of the property including any proportionate share in respect of which 
the claim of any pre -emptor failing to comply with the said provisions would, but for 
such default, have taken effect; and 
b) If and in so far as the claims decreed are different in degree, that the claim of the 
inferior pre -emptor shall not take effect unless and until the superior pre -emptor has 
failed to comply with the said provisions.  
15. Where a suit is for the disso lution of a partnership or the taking of partnership 
accounts the Court, before passing a final, decree, may pass as preliminary decree 

declaring the proportionate shares of the parties, fixing the day on which the partnership 
shall stand dissolved or be d eemed to have been dissolved, and directing such accounts to 
be taken, and other acts to be done, as it thinks fit.  
16. In a suit for an account of pecuniary transactions between a principal and an agent, 
and in any other suit not herein -before provided fo r, where it is necessary, in order to 
ascertain the amount of money due to or from any party, that an account should be taken, 
the Court shall, before passing its final decree, pass a preliminary decree directing such 
accounts to be taken as it thinks fit.  
17. The Court may either by the decree directing an account to be taken or by any 
subsequent order give special directions with regard to the mode in which the account is 
to be taken or vouched and in particular may direct that in taking the account the b ooks of 
account in which the accounts in question have been kept shall be taken as prima facie 
evidence of the truth of the matters therein contained with liberty to the parties interested 
to take such objection thereto as they may be advised.  
18. Where th e Court passes a decree for the partition of property or for the separate 
possession of a share therein, then - 
1) if and in so far as the decree relates to an estate assessed to the payment of revenue to 
the Government, the decree shall declare the rights of the several parties interested in the 
property, but shall direct such partition or separation to be made by the Collector, or any 
gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance with 
such declaration and with the provi sions of section 54;  
2) if and in so far as such decree relates to any other immovable property or to movable 
property, the Court may, if partition or separation cannot be conveniently made without 
further inquiry, pass a preliminary decree declaring the r ights of the several parties 
interested in the property and giving such further directions as may be required.  
19-(1) Where the defendant has been allowed a set -off against the claim of the plaintiff, 
the decree shall state what amount is due to the plaint iff and what amount is due to the 
defendant, and shall be for the recovery of any sum which appears to be due to either 
party.  
(2) Any decree passed in a suit in which a set -off is claimed shall be subject to the same 
provisions in respect of appeal to whi ch it would have been subject if no set -off had been 
claimed.  
(3) The provisions of this rule shall apply whether the set -off is admissible under rule 6 of 
Order VIII or otherwise.  
20. Certified copies of the judgment and decree shall be furnished to the p arties on 
application to the Court and at their expense.  
ORDER XXI  

EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDERS  
Payment under Decrees  
 
1.-(1) All money payable under a decree shall be paid as follows, namely: - 
a) into the Court whose duty it is to execute the decree;  
or 
b) out of Court to the decree -holder [through a bank or by postal money order or evidence 
by writing signed by the decree - holder or his authorized agent]; or  
c) otherwise as the Court which made the decree directs.  
(2) Where any payment is made under c lause (a) of sub -rule (1), notice of such payment 
shall be given to the decree -holder.  
2-(1) Where any money payable under a decree of any kind is paid out of Court, or the 
decree is otherwise adjusted in whole or in part to the satisfaction of the decree -holder, 
the decree -holder shall certify such payment or adjustment to the Court whose duty it is 
to execute the decree, and the Court shall record the same accordingly.  
(2) The judgment -debtor also may inform the Court of such payment or adjustment and 
apply to the Court to issue a notice to the decree -holder to show cause, on a day to be 
fixed by the Court, why such payment or adjustment should not be recorded as certified; 
and if, after service of such notice, the decree -holder fails to show cause why the  
payment or adjustment should not be recorded as certified, the Court shall record the 
same accordingly.  
[(3) Any payment not made in the manner provided in rule 1 or any adjustment not made 
in writing shall not be recognized by the Court executing the dec ree.] 
Courts executing Decrees  
3. Where immovable property forms one estate or tenure situate within the local limits of 
the jurisdiction of two or more Courts, any one of such Courts may attach and sell the 
entire estate or tenure.  
4. [Transfer to Court o f Small Causes.] Omitted by the A.O., 1949.  
5. Where the Court to which a decree is to be sent for execution is situate within the same 
district as the Court which passed such decree, such Court shall send the same directly to 
the former Courts. But, where  the Court to which the decree is to be sent for execution is 
situate in a different district, the Court which passed it shall send it to the District Court 
of the district in which the decree is to be executed.  
6. The Court sending a decree for execution shall send - 

a) a copy of the decree;  
b) a certificate setting forth that satisfaction of the decree has not been obtained by 
execution within the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, or where the decree 
has been executed in part, the extent t o which satisfaction has been obtained and what 
part of the decree remains unsatisfied; and  
c) a copy of any order for the execution of the decree, or, if no such order has been made, 
a certificate to that effect.  
7. The Court to which a decree is so sent shall cause such copies and certificates to be 
filed, without any further proof of the decree or order for execution, or of the copies 
thereof unless the Court for any special reasons to be recorded under the hand of the 
Judge, requires such proof.  
8. Wher e such copies are so filed, the decree or order may, if the Court to which it is sent 
is the District Court, be executed by such Court or be transferred for execution to any 
subordinate Court of competent jurisdiction.  
9. Where the Court to which the decre e is sent for execution is a High Court, the decree 
shall be executed by such Court in the same manner as if it had been passed by such 
Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.  
Application for Execution  
10. Where the holder of a d ecree desires to execute it, he shall apply to the Court which 
passed the decree to or the officer (if any) appointed in this behalf, or if the decree has 
been sent under the provisions hereinbefore contained to another Court then to such 
Court or to the p roper officer thereof.  
11. (1) Where a decree is for the payment of money the Court may, on the oral 
application of the decree -holder at the time of the passing of the decree, order immediate 
execution thereof by the arrest of the judgment -debtor prior to the preparation of a 
warrant if he is within the precincts of the Court.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided by sub -rule (1), every application for the execution of a 
decree shall be in writing, signed and verified by the applicant or by some other person 
prove d to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case, and 
shall contain in a tabular form the following particulars, namely - 
a) the number of the suit;  
b) the names of the parties;  
c) the date of the decree;  
d) whether any appeal  has been preferred from the decree;  
e) whether any, and (if any), what payment or other adjustment of the matter in 
controversy has been made between the parties subsequently to the decree;  
f) whether any, and (if any) what, previous applications have bee n made for the execution 
of the decree, the dates of such applications and their results;  

g) the amount with interest (if any) due upon the decree, or other relief granted thereby, 
together with particulars of any cross -decree, whether passed before or aft er the date of 
the decree sought to be executed;  
h) the amount of the costs (if any) awarded;  
i) the name of the person against whom execution of the decree is sought; and  
j) the mode in which the assistance of the Court is required, whether - 
i) by the de livery of any property specifically decreed;  
ii) by the attachment and sale, or by the sale without attachment, of any property;  
iii) by the arrest and detention in prison of any person;  
iv) by the appointment of a receiver;  
v) otherwise as the nature of t he relief granted may require.  
(3) The Court to which an application is made under sub -rule (2) may require the 
applicant to produce a certified copy of the decree.  
12. Where an application is made for the attachment of any movable property belonging 
to a judgment -debtor but not in his possession, the decree - holder shall annex to the 
application an inventory of the property to be attached, containing a reasonably accurate 
description of the same.  
13. Where an application is made for the attachment of any i mmovable property 
belonging to a judgment -debtor, it shall contain at the foot - 
a) a description of such property sufficient to identify the same and, in case such property 
can be identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or survey, a 
specification of such boundaries or numbers; and  
b) a specification of the judgment -debtor's share or interest in such property to the best of 
the belief of the applicant, and so far as he has been able to ascertain the same.  
14. Where an application is mad e for the attachment of any land which is registered in the 
office of the Collector, the Court may require the applicant to produce a certified extract 
from the register of such office, specifying the persons registered as proprietors of, or as 
possessing any transferable interest in the land or its revenue, or as liable to pay revenue 
for the land, and the shares of the registered proprietors.  
15.-(1) Where a decree has been passed jointly in favour of more persons than one, any 
one or more of such persons  may, unless the decree imposes any condition to the 
contrary, apply for the execution of the whole decree for the benefit of them all, or, where 
any of them has dies, for the benefit of the survivors and the legal representatives of the 
deceased.  
(2) Whe re the Court sees sufficient cause for allowing the decree to be executed on an 
application made under this rule, it shall make such order as it deems necessary for 
protecting the interest of the persons who have not joined in the application.  

16. Where a decree or, if a decree has been passed jointly in favour of two or more 
persons, the interest of any decree -holder in the decree is transferred by assignment in 
writing or by operation of law, the transferee may apply for execution of the decree to the 
Court which passed it; and the decree may be executed in the same manner and subject to 
the same conditions as if the application were made by such decree -holder;  
Provided that, where the decree, or such interest as aforesaid, has been transferred by 
assignme nt, notice of such application shall be given to the transferor and the judgment -
debtor, and the decree shall not be executed until the Court has heard their objections (if 
any) to its execution;  
Provided also that, where a decree for the payment of money against two or more persons 
has been transferred to one of them, it shall not be executed against the others.  
17.- (1) On receiving an application for the execution of a decree as provided by rule 11, 
sub-rule(2), the Court shall ascertain whether such of the requirements of rules 11 to 14 
as may be applicable to the case have been complied with; and if they have not been 
complied with, the Court may reject the application, or may allow the defect to tbe 
remedied then and there or within a time to be fixed by it.  
(2) Where an application is amended under the provisions of sub -rule (1), it shall be 
deemed to have been an application in accordance with law and presented on the date 
when it was first presented.  
(3)Every amendment made under this rule shall be s igned or initialled by the Judge.  
(4) When the application is admitted, the Court shall enter in the proper register a not eof 
the application and the date on which it was made, and shall, subject to the provisions 
hereinafter contained, order execution of  the decree according to the nature of the 
application;  
Provided that, in the case of decree for the payment of money, the alue of the property 
attached shall, as nearly as may be, correspond with the amount due under the decree.  
18 - (1) Where application s are made to a Court for the execution of cross -decrees in 
separate suits for the payment of two sums of money passed between the same parties 
and capable of execution at the same time such Court, then - 
a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction shall be  entered upon both decrees; and  
b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken out only by the holder of the 
decree for the larger sum and for so much only as remains after deducting the smaller 
sum, and satisfaction for the smaller sum shall be en tered on the decree for the larger sum 
as well as satisfaction of the decree for the smaller sum.  
 
(2) This rule shall be deemed to apply where either party is an assignee of one of the 

decrees and as well in respect of judgment -debts due by the original a ssignor as in respect 
of judgment -debts due by the assignee himself.  
(3) This rule shall not be deemed to apply unless - 
a) the decree -holder in one of the suits in which the decrees have been made is the 
judgment -debtor in the other and each party fills t he same character in both suits; and  
b) the sums due under the decree are definite.  
(4) The holder of a decree passed against several persons jointly and severally may treat 
it as a cross -decree in relation to a decree passed against him singly in favour o f one or 
more of such persons.  
Illustrations  
(a) A holds a decree against B for Rs1,000. B holds a decree against A for the payment of 
Rs.1000 in case A fails to deliver certain goods at a future day. B cannot treat his decree 
as a cross -decree under this rule. 
(b) A and B, co -plaintiffs, obtain a decree for Rs.1,000 against C, and C obtains a decree 
for kRs.1,000 against B. C cannot treat his decree as a cross -decree under this rule.  
(c) A, obtains a decree against B for Rs.1,000. C who is a trustee for B,  obtains a decree 
on behalf of B against A for Rs.1,000. B cannot treat C's decree as a cross -decree under 
this rule.  
(d) A, B, C, D and E are jointly and severely liable for Rs.1,000 under a decree obtained 
by F. A obtains a decree for Rs.100 against F si ngly and applies for execution to the 
Court in which the joint -decree is being executed. F may treat his joint -decree as a cross -
decree under this rule.  
19. Where application is made to a Court for the execution of a decree under which two 
parties are enti tled to recover sums of money from each other, then, - 
a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction for both shall be entered upon the decree; and  
b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken out only by the party entitled to 
the larger sum and for  so much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and 
satisfaction for the smaller sum shall be entered upon the decree.  
20. The provisions contained in rules 18 and 19 shall apply to decrees for sale in 
enforcement of a mortgage or charge.  
21. The  Court may, in its discretion, refuse execution at the same time against the person 
and property of the judgment -debtor.  
22-(1) Where an application for execution is made - 
a) more than one year after the date of the decree, or  
b) against the legal repres entative of a party to the decree, [or where an application is 
made for execution of a decree filed under the provisions of section 44 -A] the Court 

executing the decree shall issue a notice to the person against whom execution is applied 
for requiring him to show cause, on a date to be fixed, why the decree should not be 
executed against him:  
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary in consequence of more than one year 
having elapsed between the date of the decree and the application for execution if  the 
application is made within one year from the date of the last order against the party 
against whom execution is applied for, made on any previous application for execution, 
or in consequence of the application being made against the legal representati ve of the 
judgment -debtor, if upon a previous application for execution against the same person the 
Court has ordered execution to issue against him:  
(2) Nothing in the foregoing sub -rule shall be deemed to preclude the Court from issuing 
any process in ex ecution of a decree without issuing the notice thereby prescribed, if, for 
reasons to be recorded, it considers that the issue of such notice would cause 
unreasonable delay or would defeat the ends of justice.  
23. (1) Where the person to whom notice is iss ued under the last preceding rule does not 
appear or does not show cause to the satisfaction of the Court why the decree should not 
be executed, the Court shall order the decree to be executed.  
(2) Where such person offers any objection to the execution of  the decree, the Court shall 
consider such objection and make such order as it thinks fit.  
[Objection to Execution  
23-A . An objection by the judgment -debtor to the execution of a decree shall not be 
considered by the Court unless - 
a) in case of a decree for the payment of money, he either deposits the decretal amount in 
Court or furnishes security for its payment; and  
b) in the case of any other decree, he furnishes security for the due performance of the 
decree]  
Process for Execution  
24. (1) When the pre liminary measures (if any) required by the foregoing rule have been 
taken, the Court shall, unless it sees cause to the contrary, issue its process for the 
execution of the decree.  
(2) Every such process shall bear date the day on which it is issued, and s hall be signed 
by the Judge or such officer as the Court may appoint in this behalf, and shall be sealed 
with the seal of the Court and delivered to the proper officer to be executed.  
(3) In every such process a day shall be specified on or before which it  shall be executed.  

25. (1) The officer entrusted with the execution of the process shall endorse thereon the 
day on, and the manner in, which it was executed, and, if the latest day specified in the 
process for the return thereof has been exceeded, the re ason of the delay, or, if it was not 
executed, the reason why it was not executed, and shall return the process with such 
endorsement to the Court.  
(2) Where the endorsement is to the effect that such officer is unable to execute the 
process, the Court sha ll examine him touching his alleged inability, and, if it thinks fit, 
summon and examine witnesses as to such inability, and shall record the result.  
Stay of Execution  
26. (1) The Court to which a decree has been sent for execution shall, upon sufficient 
cause being shown, stay the execution of such decree for a reasonable time, to enable the 
judgment -debtor to apply to the Court by which the decree was passed, or to any Court 
having appellate jurisdiction in respect of the decree or, the execution thereof,  for an 
order to stay execution, or for any other order relating to the decree or execution which 
might have been made by such Court of first instance or appellate Court if execution had 
been issued thereby, or if application for execution had been made th ereto.  
(2) Where the property or person of the judgment -debtor has been seized under an 
execution the Court which issued the execution may order the restitution of such property 
or the discharge of such person pending the result of the application.  
[(3) - Omitted].  
27. No order of restitution or discharge under rule 26 shall prevent the property or person 
of a judgment -debtor from being retaken in execution of the decree sent for execution.  
28. Any order of the Court by which the decree was passed, or of su ch Court of appeal as 
aforesaid, in relation to the execution of such decree, shall be binding upon the Court to 
which the decree was sent for execution.  
29. Where a suit is pending in any Court against the holder of a decree of such Court, on 
the part of the person against whom the decree was passed, the Court may, on such terms 
as to security or otherwise, as it thinks fit, stay execution of the decree until the pending 
suit has been decided.  
Mode of Execution  
30. Every decree for the payment of money, in cluding a decree for the payment of money 
as the alternative to some other relief, may be executed by the detention in […] prison of 
the judgment -debtor, or by the attachment and sale of his property, or by the both.  
31. (1) Where the decree is for any spe cific movable, or for any share in a specific 
movable, it may be executed by the seizure, if practicable, of the movable or share, and 

by the delivery thereof to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as he 
appoints to receive delivery o n his behalf, or by the detention in [….] prison of the 
judgment -debtor, or by the attachment of his property, or by both.  
(2) Where any attachment under sub -rule (1) has remained in force for six months if the 
judgment -debtor has not obeyed the decree and  the decree -holder has applied to have the 
attached property sold, such property may be sold, and out of the proceeds the Court may 
award to the decree -holder, in cases where any amount has been fixed by the decree to be 
paid as an alternative to delivery of movable property, such amount, and, in other cases, 
such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the balance (if any), to the judgment -
debtor on his application.  
(3) Where the judgment -debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all costs of executing th e 
same which he is bound to pay, or where, at the end of six months from the date of the 
attachment, no application to have the property sold has been made, or if made, has been 
refused, the attachment shall cease.  
32. (1) Where the party against whom a de cree for the specific performance of a contract, 
or for restitution of conjugal rights, or for an injunction, has been passed, has had an 
opportunity of obeying the decree and has willfully failed to obey it the decree may be 
enforced [ in the case of a de cree for restitution of conjugal rights by the attachment of 
his property or, in the case of a decree for the specific performance of a contract or for an 
injunction] by his detention in [….]prison, or by the attachment of his property, or by 
both.  
(2) Whe re the party against whom a decree for specific performance or for an injunction 
has been passed is a corporation, the decree may be enforced by the attachment of the 
property of the corporation, or with the leave of the Court, by the detention in [….] pri son 
of the directors or other principal officers thereof or by both attachment and detention.  
(3)Where any attachment under sub -rule (1) or sub -rule(2) has remained in force for one 
year if the judgement debtor has not obeyed the decree and the decree -holder has applied 
to have the attached property sold, such property may be sold; and out of the proceeds the 
Court may award to the decree -holder such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay 
the balance (if any), to the judgment -debtor on his application . 
(4) Where the judgment -debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all costs of executing the 
same which he is bound to pay, or where, at the end of one year from the date of the 
attachment, no application to have the property sold has been made, or if made ha s been 
refused, the attachment shall cease.  
(5) Where decree for the specific performance of a contract or for an injunction has not 
been obeyed, the Court may, in lieu of or in addition to all or any of the processes 
aforesaid, direct that the act require d to be done may be done so far as practicable by the 
decree -holder or some other person appointed by the Court,. At the cost of the judgment -
debtor, and upon the act being done the expenses incurred may be ascertained in such 

manner as the Court may direc t and may be recovered as if they were included in the 
decree.  
Illustrations  
A, a person of little substance, erects a building which renders uninhabitable a family 
mansion belonging to B. A in spite of his detention in prison and the attachment of his 
property, declines to obey a decree obtained against him by B and directing him to 
remove the building. The Court is of opinion that no sum realizable by the sale of A's 
property would adequately compensate B for the depreciation in the value of his mansion. 
B may apply to the Court to remove the building and may recover the cost of such 
removal from A in the execution -proceedings.  
33. (1) Notwithstanding anything in rule 32, the Court either at the time of passing a 
decree[ against a husband] for the restitut ion of conjugal rights or at any time afterwards, 
may order that the decree [ shall be executed in the manner provided in this rule].  
(2) Where the Court has made an order under sub -rule (1)*** it may order that, in the 
event of the decree not being obeyed  within such period as may be fixed in this behalf, 
the judgment -debtor shall make to the decree -holder such periodical payments as may be 
just, and, if it thinks fit, require that the judgement -debtor shall, to its satisfaction, secure 
to the decree -holde r such periodical payments.  
(3)The Court may from time to time vary or modify any order made under sub -rule (2) 
for the periodical payment of money, either by altering the times of payment or by 
increasing or diminishing the amount, or may temporarily susp end the same as to the 
whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again revive the same, either 
wholly or in part as it may think just.  
(4) Any money ordered to be paid under this rule may be recovered as though it were 
payable under a decre e for the payment of money.  
34.(1) Where a decree is for the execution of a document or for the endorsement of a 
negotiable instrument and the judgment -debtor neglects or refuses to obey the decree, the 
decree -holder may prepare a draft of the document or endorsement in accordance with 
the terms of the decree and deliver the same to the Court.  
(2) The Court shall thereupon cause the draft to be served on the judgment -debtor 
together with a notice requiring his objections (if any) to be made within such time  as the 
Court fixes in this behalf.  
(3) Where the judgement -debtor objects to the draft, his objections shall be stated in 
writing within such time, and the Court shall make such order approving or altering the 
draft, as it thinks fit.  

(4) The decree -holde r shall deliver to the Court a copy of the draft with such alterations 
(if any) as the Court may have directed upon the proper stamp -paper if a stamp is 
required by the law for the time being in force; and the judge or such officer as may be 
appointed in t his behalf shall execute the document so delivered.  
(5) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a negotiable instrument under this 
rule may be in the following form, namely: - 
"C.D., Judge of the Court of  
(or as the case may be), for A. B., in a s uit by E.F. against A.B." and shall have the same 
effect as the execution of the document or the endorsement of the negotiable instrument 
by the party ordered to execute or endorse the same.  
(6) The Court, or such officer as it may appoint in this behalf, shall cause the document to 
be registered if its registration is required by law for the time being in force or the decree -
holder desires to have it registered, and may make such order as it thinks fit as to the 
payment of the expenses of the registration.  
35. (1) Where a decree is for the delivery of any immovable property, possession thereof 
shall be delivered to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as he may 
appoint to receive delivery on his behalf, and, if necessary, by removing an y person 
bound by the decree who refuses to vacate the property.  
(2) Where a decree is for the joint possession of immovable property, such possession 
shall be delivered by affixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the 
property and procla iming by beat of drum, or other customary mode, at some convenient 
place, the substance of the decree.  
(3) Where possession of any building or enclosure is to be delivered and the person in 
possession, being bound by the decree, does no afford free access,  the Court, through its 
officers, may after giving reasonable warning and facility to any woman not appearing in 
public according to the customs of the country to withdraw, remove or open any lock or 
bolt or break open any door or do any other act necessar y for putting the decree -holder in 
possession.  
36. Where a decree is for the delivery of any immovable property in the occupancy of a 
tenant or other person entitled to occupy the same and not bound by the decree to 
relinquish such occupancy, the Court sha ll order delivery to be made by affixing a copy 
of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the 
occupant by beat of drum or other customary mode, at some convenient place, the 
substance of the decree in regard to the proper ty. 
Arrest and Detention in [….] Prison  

37. (1) Notwithstanding anything in these rules, where an application is for the execution 
of a decree for the payment of money by the arrest and detention in [……] prison of a 
judgment -debtor who is liable to be arre sted in pursuance of the application, the Court 
[shall, instead of issuing a warrant for his arrest, issue a notice calling upon him to appear 
before the Court on a day to be specified in the notice and show cause why he should not 
be [detained in] prison.  
[Provided that such notice shall not be necessary if the Court is satisfied, by affidavit, or 
otherwise, that with the object or effect of delaying the execution of the decree, the 
judgment -debtor is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the juri sdiction of the 
Court.]  
(2) Where appearance is not made in obedience to the notice, the Court shall, if the 
decree -holder so requires, issue a warrant for the arrest of the judgment -debtor.  
38. Every warrant for the arrest of a judgment -debtor shall direc t the officer entrused with 
its execution to bring him before the Court with all convenient speed, unless the amount 
which he has been ordered to pay, together with the interest thereon and the cost (if any) 
to which he is liable, be sooner paid.  
39. [Omit ted by Civil Laws (Reforms) Act (XIV of 1994), S.11(7) (vi)].  
40. (1) When a judgment -debtor appears before the Court in obedience to a notice issued 
under rule 37, or is brought before the Court after being arrested in execution of a decree 
for the paymen t of money, the Court shall proceed to hear the decree -holder and take all 
such evidence as may be produced by him in support of his application for execution, and 
shall then give the judgment -debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he should not 
be [de tained in] prison.  
(2) Pending the conclusion of the inquiry under sub -rule (1) the Court may, in its 
discretion, order the judgment -debtor to be detained in the custody of an officer of the 
Court or release him on his furnishing security to the satisfacti on of the Court for his 
appearance when required.  
(3) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry under sub -rule (1) the Court may, subject to the 
provisions of section 51 and to the other provisions of this Code, make an order for the 
detention of the judgment -debtor in [….] prison and shall in that event cause him to be 
arrested if he is not already under arrest:  
Provided that in order to give the judgment -debtor an opportunity of satisfying the 
decree, the Court may, before making the order of detention, leave th e judgment -debtor 
in the custody of an officer of the Court for a specified period not exceeding fifteen days 
or release him on his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the Court for his 
appearance at the expiration of the specified period if the dec ree be not sooner satisfied.  
(4) A judgment -debtor released under this rule may be re -arrested.  

(5) When the Court does not make an order of detention under sub -rule (3), it shall 
disallow the application and, if the judgment -debtor is under arrest, direct  his release.]  
Attachment of Property  
41. Where a decree is for the payment of money the decree -holder may apply to the Court 
for an order that -  
a) the judgment -debtor, or  
b) in the case of a corporation, any officer thereof, or  
c) any other person,  
be orally examined as to whether any or what debts are owing to the judgment -debtor and 
whether the judgment -debtor has any and what other property or means of satisfying the 
decree; and the Court may make an order for the attendance and examination of such 
judgment -debtor or officer or other person, and for the production of any books or 
documents.  
42. Where a decree directs an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits or any other matter, the 
property of the judgment -debtor may, before the amount due from him has been 
ascertained, be attached, as in the case of an ordinary decree for the payment of money.  
43. Where the property to be attached is movable property, other than agricultural 
produce, in the possession of the judgment -debtor the attachment shall be made by acutal 
seizure, and the attaching officer shall keep the property in his own custody or in the 
custody of one of his subordinates, and shall be responsible for the due custody thereof:  
Provided that, when the property seized is subject to speedy and nat ural decay, or when 
the expense of keeping in custody is likely to exceed its vaue, the attaching officer may 
sell it at once.  
44. Where the property to be attached is agricultural produce, the attachment shall be 
made affixing a copy of the warrant of att achment, - 
a) where such produce is a growing crop, on the land on which such crop has grown or  
b) where such produce has been cut or gathered, on the threshing -floor or place for 
treading out grain or the like or fodder -stack on or in which it is deposited , 
and another copy on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in 
which the judgment -debtor ordinarily resides or, with the leave of the Court, on the outer 
door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in which he carries on bus iness or 
personally works for gain or in which he is known to have last resided or carried on 
business or personally worked for gain; and the produce shall thereupon be deemed to 
have passed into the possession of the Court.  
45. (1) Where agricultural prod uce is attached, the Court shall make such arrangements 
for the custody thereof as it may deem sufficient and, for the purpose of enabling the 

Court to make such arrangements every application for the attachment of a growing crop 
shall specify the time at which it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Court in this behalf either in the 
order of attachment or in any subsequent order, the judgment -debtor may tend, cut, gather 
and store the produce a nd do any other act necessary for maturing or preserving it; and if 
the judgment -debtor fails to do all or any of such acts, the decree -holder may, with the 
permission of the Court and subject to the like conditions, do all or any of them either by 
himself  or by any person appointed by him in this behalf, and the costs incurred by the 
decree -holder shall be recoverable from the judgment -debtor as if they were included in, 
or formed part of, the decree.  
(3) Agricultural produce attached as a growing crop sha ll not be deemed to have ceased 
to be under attachment or to require re -attachment merely because it has been severed 
from the soil.  
(4) Where an order for the attachment of a growing crop has been made a considerable 
time before the crop is likely to be f it to be cut or gathered, the Court may suspend the 
execution of the order for such time as it thinks fit, and may, in its discretion, make a 
further order prohibiting the removal of the crop pending the execution of the order of 
attachment.  
(5) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit of being stored shall not be 
attached under this rule at any time less than twenty days before the time at which it is 
likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.  
46. (1) In the case of - 
a) a debt not secured by a neg otiable instrument,  
b) a share in the capital of a corporation,  
c) other movable property not in the possession of the judgment -debtor, except property 
deposited in, or in the custody of, any Court,  
the attachment shall be made by a written order prohibiti ng, - 
i) in the case of debt the creditor from recovering the debt and the debtor from making 
payment thereof until the further order of the Court;  
ii) in the case of the share, the person in whose name the share may be standing from 
transferring the same or receiving any dividend thereon;  
iii) in the case of the other movable property except as aforesaid, the person in possession 
of the same from giving it over to the judgment -debtor.  
(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some conspicuous part of th e Court -house 
and another copy shall be sent in the case of the debt, to the debtor, in the case of the 
share, to the proper officer of the corporation, and, in the case of the other movable 
property (except as aforesaid), to the person in possession of th e same.  

(3) A debtor prohibited under clause (I) of sub -rule (1) may pay the amount of his debt 
into Court, and such payment shall discharge him as effectually as payment to the party 
entitled to receive the same.  
47. Where the property to be attached cons ists of the share or interest of the judgment -
debtor in movable property belonging to him and another as co -owners, the attachment 
shall be made by a notice to the judgment -debtor prohibiting him from transferring the 
share or interest or charging it in an y way.  
48.-(1) Where the property to be attached is the salary or allowance of a [servant of the 
[State] ] or a servant of a railway company or local authority, the Court, whether the 
judgment -debtor or the disbursing officer is or is not within the local limits of the Court's 
jurisdiction, may order that the amount shall, subject to the provisions of section 60, be 
withheld from such salary or allowances either in one payment or by monthly instalments 
as Court may direct; and upon notice of the order to su ch officer as [the appropriate 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette] appoint [in this behalf, - 
a) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed within the local limits to which 
this Code for the time being extends, the officer or ot her person whose duty I is to 
disburse the same shall withhold and remit to the Court the amount due under the order, 
or the monthly instalments, as the case may be;  
b) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed beyond the said limits, the officer  
or other person within those limits whose duty it is to instruct the disbursing authority 
regarding the amount of the salary or allowances to be disbursed shall remit to the Court 
the amount due under the order, or the monthly instalments, as the case may  be, and shall 
direct the disbursing authority to reduce the aggregate of the amounts from time to time 
be disbursed by the aggregate of the amounts from time to time remitted to the Court].  
(2) Where the attachable proportion of such salary or allowances is already being 
withheld and remitted to a Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of 
attachment, the officer appointed by [the appropriate Government] in this behalf shall 
forthwith return the subsequent order to the Court issuing it with a full statement of all 
the particulars of the existing attachment.  
(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is returned in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -rule (2), shall, without further notice or other process, bind [the 
appropriate Governm ent] or the railway company or local authority, as the case may be, 
while the judgment -debtor is within the local limits to which this Code for the time being 
extends and while he is beyond hose limits if he is in receipt of any salary or allowances 
payabl e out of[the revenues of the Central Government or a Provincial Government] or 
the funds of a railway company carrying on business in any part of [Pakistan or local 
authority in [Pakistan]; and [the appropriate Government] or the railway company or 
local a uthority, as the case may be, shall be liable for any sum paid in contravention of 
this rule.  
[Explanation - In this rule "appropriate Government" means - 

i. as respects any[person] in the service of the Central Government, or any servant of a 
"railway or of a cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port, the Central 
Government;  
ii. * * * * * *  
iii. as respects any other [servant of the [State] or a servant of any other railway or local 
authority the Provincial Government]  
49. -(1) Save as otherwise provided by this rule, property belonging to a partnership shall 
not be attached or sold in execution of a decree other than a decree passed against the 
firm or against the partners in the firm as such.  
(2) The Court may, on the application of th e holder of a decree against a partner, make an 
order charging the interest of such partner in the partnership property and profits with 
payment of the amount due under the decree, and may, by the same or a subsequent 
order, appoint a receiver of the share  of such partner in the profits (whether already 
declared or accruing) and of any other money which may be coming to him in respect of 
the partnership, and direct accounts and inquiries and make an order for the sale of such 
interest or other orders as mig ht have been directed or made if a charge had been made in 
favour of the decree -holder by such partner, or as the circumstances of the case may 
require.  
(3) The other partner or partners shall be at liberty at any time to redeem the interest 
charged or, in  the case of a sale being directed, to purchase the same.  
(4) Every application for an order under sub -rule (2) shall be served on the judgment -
debtor and on his partners or such of them as are within [Pakistan].  
(5)Every application made by any partner of  the judgment -debtor under sub -rule (3) shall 
be served on the decree -holder and on the judgment -debtor and on such of the other 
partners as do not join in the application and as are within [Pakistan].  
(6) Service under sub -rule (4) or sub -rule(5) shall be  deemed to be service on all the 
partners and all orders made on such applications shall be similarly served.  
50 - (1) Where a decree has been passed against a firm execution may be granted - 
a) against any property of the partnership;  
b) against any perso n who has appeared in his own name under rule 6 or rule 7 of Order 
XXX or who has admitted on the pleadings that he is, or who has been adjudged to be, a 
partner;  
c) against any person who has been individually served as a partner with a summons and 
has fa iled to appear:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the 
provisions of section 247 of the Contract Act. 1972.  

(2) Where the decree -holder claims to be entitled to cause the decree to be executed 
against any pe rson other than such a person as is referred to in sun -rule (1), clauses (b) 
and (c), as being a partner in the firm he may apply to the Court which passed the decree 
for leave, and where the liability is not disputed, such Court may grant such leave, or 
where such liability, is disputed, may order that the liability of such person be tried and 
determined in any manner in which any issue in a suit may be tried and determined.  
(3) Where the liability of any person has been tried and determined under sub -rule (2), 
the order made thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as 
to appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree.  
(4) Save as against any property of the partnership, a decree against a firm shall not 
release, render liable or otherwise affect any partner therein unless he has been served 
with a summons to appear and answer.  
51. Where the property is a negotiable instrument not deposited in a Court, nor in the 
custody of a public officer, the attachment shall be made by actual s eizure, and the 
instrument shall be brought into Court and held subject to further orders of the Court.  
52. Where the property to be attached is in the custody of any Court or public officer, the 
attachment shall be made by a notice to such court or office r, requesting that such 
property and any interest or dividend becoming payable thereon, may be held subject to 
the further orders of the Court from which the notice is issued:  
Provided that, where such property is in the custody of a Court any question of title or 
priority arising between the decree -holder and any other person, not being the judgment -
debtor, claiming to be interested in such property by virtue of any assignment, attachment 
or otherwise, shall be determined by such Court.  
53- (1) Where the p roperty to be attached is a decree, either for the payment of money or 
for sale in enforcement of a mortgage or charge, the attachment shall be made, - 
a) if the decrees were passed by the same Court, then by order of such Court, and  
b) if the decree soug ht to be attached was passed by another Court, then by the issue to 
such other Court of a notice by the Court which passed the decree sought to be executed 
requesting such other Court to stay the execution of its decree unless and until - 
i. the Court whic h passed the decree sought to be executed cancels the notice, or  
ii. the holder of the decree sought to be executed or his judgment -debtor applies to the 
Court receiving such notice to execute its own decree.  
(2) Where a Court makes an order under clause ( a) of sub -rule (1) or receives an 
application under sub -head (ii) of clause (b) of the said sub -rule, it shall, on the 
application of the creditor who has attached the decree or his judgment -debtor, proceed to 
execute the attached decree and apply the net proceeds in satisfaction of the decree 
sought to be executed.  

(3) The holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of another decree of 
the nature specified in sub -rule (1) shall be deemed to be the representative of the holder 
of the attache d decree and to be entitled to execute such attached decree in any manner 
lawful for the holder thereof.  
(4) Where the property to be attached in the execution of a decree is a decree other than a 
decree of the nature referred to in sub -rule (1), the attac hment shall be made, by a notice 
by the Court which passed the decree sought to be executed, to the holder of the decree 
sought to be attached, prohibiting him from transferring or charging the same in any way; 
and where such decree has been passed by any other Court, also by sending to such other 
Court also by sending to such other Court a notice to abstain from executing the decree 
sought to be attached until such notice is cancelled by the Court from which it was sent.  
(5) The holder of a decree attached  under this rule shall give the Court executing the 
decree such information and aid as may reasonably be required.  
(6)On the application of the holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of 
another decree, the Court making an order of attac hment under this rule shall give notice 
of such order to the judgment -debtor bound by the decree attached; and no payment or 
adjustment of the attached decree made by the judgment -debtor in contravention of such 
order after receipt of notice thereof, eithe r through the Court or otherwise, shall be 
recognized by any Court so long as the attachment remains in force.  
54 - (1) Where the property is immovable, the attachment shall be made by an order 
prohibiting the judgment -debtor from transferring or charging the property in any way, 
and all persons from making any benefit from such transfer or charge.  
(2) The order shall be proclaimed at some place on or adjacent to such a property by beat 
of drum or other customary mode, and a copy of the order shall be affix ed on a 
conspicuous part of the property and then upon a conspicuous part of the Court -house, 
and also, where the property is land paying revenue to the Government, in the office of 
the Collector of the district in which the land is situate.  
55. Where - 
a) the amount decreed with costs and all charges and expenses resulting from the 
attachment of any property are paid into Court or,  
b) satisfaction of the decree is otherwise made through the Court or certified to the Court 
or 
c) the decree is set aside or re versed,  
the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn, and, in the case of immovable property, 
the withdrawal shall, if the judgment -debtor so desires, be proclaimed at his expense, and 
a copy of the proclamation shall be affixed in the manner prescribed by the last preceding 
rule. 

56. Where the property attached is current coin or currency notes, the court may at any 
time during the continuance of the attachment, direct that such coin or notes, or a part 
thereof sufficient to satisfy the decree, be paid o ver to the party entitled under the decree 
to receive the same.  
57. Where any property has been attached in execution of a decree but by reason of the 
decree -holder's default the Court is unable to proceed further with the application for 
execution, it sha ll either dismiss the application or for any sufficient reason adjourn the 
proceedings to a future date. Upon the dismissal of such application the attachment shall 
cease.  
Investigation of Claims and Objections  
58.- (1) Where any claim is preferred to, or any objection is made to the attachment of, 
any property attached in execution of a decree on the ground that such property is not 
liable to such attachment, the Court shall proceed to investigate the claim or objection 
with the like power as regards the e xamination of the claimant or objector, and in all 
other respects, as if he was a party to the suit:  
[Provided that no such investigation shall be made where it appears to the Court that the 
claim or objection (whether made before or after the sale) has be en designedly or 
unnecessarily delayed, or was not made within a reasonable time or within one year of 
the date of the first attachment of the said property in the execution of the said decree, 
whichever is earlier, unless the claimant or objector - 
a) pro ves title acquired in good faith and for consideration subsequent to the date of the 
first attachment;  
b) proves that his predecessors -in-interest, whether their interest existed at the time of 
such attachment or was acquired thereafter, fraudulently omitt ed to make a claim or 
objection; and  
c) impleads all such predecessors -in-interest, as parties]  
(2) Where the property to which the claim or objection applies has been advertised for 
sale, the Court ordering the sale may postpone it pending the investigati on of the claim or 
objection.  
[59. The claimant or objector must adduce evidence to show that at the date of the 
attachment he had a title to, or right or interest in, the property attached.  
60. Where upon the said investigation the Court is satisfied that  the claimant or objector 
had a title to, or right or interest in, the said property and the said property was not, by 
reason of such title, right or interest, wholly or partly liable to attachment, the Court shall 
make an order releasing the property, who lly, or as the case may be, to such extent as it is 
not so liable, from attachment.  

61. Where the Court is satisfied that the property is subject to mortgage or charge in 
favour of some person and thinks fit to continue the attachment, it may do so subject  to 
such mortgage or charge.  
62. All questions relating to the right title or interest of the claimant or objector in the 
attached property shall be adjudicated upon and determined by the Court and no separate 
sit shall lie to establish such title, right o r interest.]  
63. [Omitted]  
Sale Generally  
64. Any Court executing a decree may order that any property attached by it and liable to 
sale, or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be sold, 
and that the proceeds of such sale , or a sufficient portion thereof, shall be paid to the 
party entitled under the decree to receive the same.  
65. Sale as otherwise prescribed, every sale in execution of a decree shall be conducted 
by an officer of the Court or by such other person as the Court may appoint in this behalf, 
and shall be made by public auction in manner prescribed.  
66- (1) Where any property is ordered to be sold by public auction in execution of a 
decree, the Court shall cause a proclamation of the intended sale to be made in  the 
language of such Court.  
(2) Such proclamation shall be drawn up after notice to the decree -holder and the 
judgment -debtor and shall state the time and place of sale, and specify as fairly and 
accurately as possible - 
a) the property to be sold;  
b) the  revenue assessed upon the estate or part of the estate, where the property to be sold 
is an interest in an estate or in part of an estate paying revenue to the Government;  
c) any incumbrance to which the property is liable;  
d) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered; and  
e) every other thing which the Court considers material for a purchaser to know in order 
to judge of the nature and value of the property.  
(3) Every application for an order for sale under this rule shall be accompanied by  a 
statement signed and verified in the manner hereinbefore prescribed for the signing and 
verification of pleadings and containing, so far as they are known to or can be ascertained 
by the person making the verification, the matters required by sub -rule ( 2) to be specified 
in the proclamation.  
(4) For the purpose of ascertaining the matters to be specified in the proclamation, the 
Court may summon any person whom it thinks necessary to summon and may examine 

him in respect to any such matters and require h im to produce any document in his 
possession or power relating thereto.  
67 - (1) Every proclamation shall be made and published, as nearly as may be, in the 
manner prescribed by rule 54, sub -rule (2).  
(2) Where the Court so directs, such proclamation shall  also be published in the [official 
Gazette] or in a local newspaper, or in both , and the costs of such publication shall be 
deemed to be costs of the sale.  
(3) Where property is divided into lots for the purpose of being sold separately, it shall 
not be necessary to make a separate proclamation for each lot unless proper notice of the 
sale cannot, in the opinion of the Court, otherwise be given.  
68. Save in the case of property of the kind described in the proviso to rule 34, no sale 
hereunder shall, with out the consent in writing of the judgment -debtor, take place until 
after the expiration of at least thirty days in the case of immovable property, and of at 
least fifteen days in the case of movable property, calculated from the date on which the 
copy of the proclamation has been affixed on the Court -house of the Judge ordering the 
sale. 
69 - (1) The Court may, in its discretion, adjourn any sale hereunder to a specified day 
and hour, and the officer conducting any such sale may in his discretion adjourn t he sale, 
recording his reasons for such adjournment:  
Provided hat, where the sale is made in, or within the precincts of, the Court -house, no 
such adjournment shall be made without the leave of the Court.  
(2) Where a sale is adjourned under sub -rule(1) for  a longer period than seven days a 
fresh proclamation under rule 67 shall be made, unless the judgment -debtor consents to 
waive it.  
(3) Every sale shall be stopped if, before the lot is knocked down, the debt and costs 
(including the costs of the sale) are  tendered to the officer conducting the sale, or proof is 
given to his satisfaction that the amount of such debt and costs has been paid into the 
Court which ordered the same.  
70. Nothing in rules 66 to 69 shall be deemed to apply to any case in which the execution 
of a decree has been transferred to the Collector.  
71. Any deficiency of price which may happen on a re -sale by reason of the purchaser's 
default and all expenses attending such re -sale, shall be certified to the Court or to the 
Collector or subo rdinate of the Collector, as the case may be, by the officer or other 
person holding the sale, and shall at the instance of either the decree -holder or the 
judgment -debtor, be recoverable from the defaulting purchaser under the provisions 
relating to the e xecution of a decree for the payment of money.  

72.- (1) No holder of a decree in execution of which property is sold shall, without the 
express permission of the Court, bid for or purchase the property.  
(2) Where a decree -holder purchases with such permiss ion, the purchase -money and the 
amount due on the decree may, subject to the provisions of section 73, be set -off against 
one another, and the Court executing the decree shall enter up satisfaction of the decree in 
whole or in part accordingly.  
(3) Where a  decree -holder purchases, by himself or through another person, without such 
permission the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the application of the judgment -debtor or 
any other person whose interests are affected by the sale, by order set aside the sale; an d 
the costs of such application and order, and any deficiency of price which may happen on 
the re -sale and all expenses attending it, shall be paid by the decree -holder.  
73. No officer or other person having any duty to perform in connection with any sale 
shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for,. acquire or attempt to acquire any interest in the 
property sold.  
Sale of Movable Property  
74.- (1) Where the property to be sold is agricultural produce the sale shall be held, - 
a) if such produce is a grow ing crop, on or near the land on which such crop has grown, 
or 
b) if such produce has been cut or gathered, at or near the threshing -floor or place for 
treading out grain or the like or fodder -stack on or in which it is deposited:  
Provided that the Court m ay direct the sale to be held at the nearest place of public resort, 
if it is of opinion that the produce is thereby likely to sell to greater advantage.  
(2) Where on the produce being put up for sale, - 
a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person hol ding the sale, is not offered for it, and  
b) the owner of the produce or a person authorized to act in his behalf applies to have the 
sale postponed till the next day or, if a market is held at the place of sale, the next market -
day, 
the sale shall be post poned accordingly and shall be then completed, whatever price 
maybe offered for the produce.  
 
75.- (1) Where the property to be sold is a growing crop and the crop from its nature 
admits of being stored but has not yet been stored, the day of the sale shal l be so fixed as 
to admit of its being made ready for storing before the arrival of such day, and the sale 
shall not be held until the crop has been cut or gathered and is ready for storing.  

(2) Where the crop from its nature does not admit of being stored , it may be sold before it 
is cut and gathered, and the purchaser shall be entitled to enter on the land, and to do all 
that is necessary for the purpose of tending and cutting and or gathering it.  
76. Where the property to be sold is a negotiable instrume nt or a share in a corporation, 
the Court may, instead of directing the sale to be made by public auction, authorise the 
sale of such instrument or share through a broker.  
77- (1) Where movable property is sold by public auction the price of each lot shall  be 
paid at the time of sale or as soon after as the officer or other person holding the sale 
directs, and in default of payment the property shall forthwith be re -sold.  
(2) On payment of the purchase -money the officer or other person holding the sale shal l 
grant a receipt for the same, and the sale shall become absolute.  
(3) Where the movable property to be sold is a share in goods belonging to the judgment -
debtor and a co -owner, and two or more persons, of whom one is such co -owner, 
respectively bid the s ame sum for such property or for any lot, the bidding shall be 
deemed to be the bidding of the co -owner.  
78. No irregularity in publishing or conducting he sale of movable property shall vitiate 
the sale; but any person sustaining any injury by reason of s uch irregularity at the hand of 
any other person may institute a suit against him for compensation or (if such other 
person is the purchaser) for the recovery of the specific property and for compensation in 
default of such recovery.  
79.-(1) Where the prop erty sold is movable property of which actual seizure has been 
made, it shall be delivered to the purchaser.  
(2) Where the property sold is movable property in the possession of some person other 
than the judgment -debtor, the delivery thereof to the purcha ser shall be made by giving 
notice to the person in possession prohibiting him from delivering possession of the 
property to any person except the purchaser.  
(3) Where the property sold is a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument, or is a share 
in a c orporation, the delivery thereof shall be made by a written order of the Court 
prohibiting the creditor from receiving the debt or any interest thereon, and the debtor 
from making payment thereof to any person except the purchaser, or prohibiting the 
perso n in whose name the share may be standing from making any transfer of the share to 
any person except the purchaser, or receiving payment of any dividend or interest 
thereon, and the manager, secretary or other proper officer of the corporation from 
permitt ing any such transfer or making any such payment to any person except the 
purchaser.  
80.-(1) Where the execution of a document or the endorsement of the party in whose 
name a negotiable instrument or a share in a corporation is standing is required to tran sfer 
such negotiable instrument or share, the Judge or such officer as he may appoint in this 

behalf may execute such document or make such endorsement as may be necessary, and 
such execution or endorsement shall have the same effect as an execution or end orsement 
by the party.  
(2) Such execution or endorsement may be in the following form namely: - 
AB by CD Judge of the Court of (or as the case may be) in a suit by EF against AB.  
(3) Until the transfer of such negotiable instrument or share, the Court may b y order 
appoint some person to receive any interest or divided due thereon and to sign a receipt 
for the same; and any receipt so signed shall be as valid and effectual for all purposes as 
if the same had been signed by the party himself.  
81. In case of an y movable property not hereinbefore provided for, the Court may make 
an order vesting such property in the purchaser or as he may direct; and such property 
shall vest accordingly.  
 
Sale of Immovable Property  
82. Sales of immovable property in execution of decrees may be ordered by any Court 
other than a Court of Small Causes.  
83.- (1) Where an order for the sale of immovable property has been made, if the 
judgment -debtor can satisfy the Court that there is reason to believe that the amount of 
the decree may  be raised by the mortgage or lease or private sale of such property, or 
some part thereof, or of any other immovable property of the judgement -debtor the Court 
may on his application postpone the sale of the property comprised in the order for sale 
on suc h terms and for such period as it thinks proper, to enable him to raise the amount.  
(2) In such case the Court shall grant a certificate to the judgment -debtor authorizing him 
within a period to be mentioned therein, and notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 64 to make the proposed mortgage lease or sale:  
Provided that all monies payable under such mortgage, lease or sale shall be paid not to 
the judgment -debtor, but save in so far as a decree -holder is entitled to set -off such 
money under the provi sions of rule 72 into Court:  
Provided also that no mortgage leases or sale under this rule shall become absolute until 
it has been confirmed by the Court.  
(3) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to apply to a sale of property directed to be sold 
in execut ion of a decree for sale in enforcement of a mortgage of or charge on such 
property.  
84.-(1) On every sale of immovable property the person declared to be the purchaser shall 
pay immediately after such declaration a deposit ot twenty -five per cent. On the amount 

of his purchase money to the officer or other person conducting the sale and in default of 
such deposit the property shall forthwith be resold.  
(2) Where the decree holder is the purchaser and is entitled to set off the purchase -money 
under rule 12 , the Court may dispense with the requirements of this rule.  
85. The full amount of purchase -money payable shall be paid by the purchaser into Court 
before the Court closes on the fifteenth day from the sale of the property:  
Provided that in calculating th e amount to be so paid into Court, the purchaser shall have 
the advantage of any set -off to which he may be entitled under rule 72.  
 
86. In default of payment within the period mentioned in the last preceding rule the 
deposit may if the court thinks fit af ter defraying the expenses of the sale, be forfeited to 
the Government and the property shall be re -sold and the defaulting purchaser shall 
forfeit all claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently be 
sold.  
87. Every re -sale of immovable property in default of payment of the purchase -money 
within the period allowed for such payment shall be made after the issue of a fresh 
proclamation in the manner and for the period hereinbefore prescribed for the sale.  
88. Where the propert y sold is a share of undivided immovable property and two or more 
persons of whom one is a co -sharer, respectively bid the same sum for such property or 
for any lot the bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the co -sharer.  
89. - (1) Where immovable property has been sold in execution of a decree, any person 
either owning such property or holding an interest therein by virtue of a title acquired 
before such sale may apply to have the sale set aside on his depositing in Court, - 
a) for payment to the purchaser a sum equal to five per cent of the purchase money; and  
b) for payment to the decree holder the amount specified in the proclamation of sale as 
that for the recovery of which the sale was ordered less any amount which may since the 
date of such proclamati on of sale have been received by the decree holder.  
(2) Where a person applied under rule 90 to set aside the sale of his immovable property 
he shall not unless he withdraws his application be entitled to make or prosecute an 
application under this rule.  
(3) Nothing in this rule shall relieve the judgement -debtor from any liability he may be 
under in respect of costs and interest not covered by the proclamation of sale.  
90. Where any immovable property has been sold in execution of a decree the decree -
holde r or any person entitled to share in a rateable distribution of assets or whose 
interests are affected by the sale may apply to the Court to set aside the sale on the 
ground of a material irregularity or fraud in publishing or conducting it:  

Provided that no sale shall be set aside on the ground of irregularity or fraud unless upon 
the facts proved the Court is satisfied that the applicant has sustained substantial injury by 
reason of such irregularity or fraud [and]  
[Provided also that no such application shall be entertained unless the applicant deposits 
such amount not exceeding twenty per cent of the sum realized at the sale or furnishes 
such security as the Court may direct]  
[Provided further that no such application shall be entertained unless the appl icant 
deposits such amount not exceeding twenty per cent of the sum realized at the sale or 
furnishes such security as the Court may direct.]  
91. 91. The purchaser at any such sale in execution of a decree may apply to the Court to 
set aside the sale on th e ground that the judgment -debtor had no saleable interest in the 
property sold.  
92.- (1) Where no application is made under rule 89, rule 90 or rule 91, or where such 
application is made and disallowed the Court shall make an order confirming the sale and  
thereupon the sale shall become absolute.  
(2) Where such application is made and allowed and where in the case of an application 
under rule 89 the deposit required by that rule is made within thirty days from the date of 
sale the Court shall make an order  setting aside the sale:  
Provided that no order shall be made unless notice of the application has been given to all 
persons affected thereby.  
(3) No suit to set aside an order made under this rule shall be brought by any person 
against whom such order is made.  
93. Where a sale of immovable property is set aside under rule 92 the purchaser shall be 
entitled to an order for repayment of his purchase money with or without interest as the 
Court may direct against any person to whom it has been paid.  
94. Where a sale of immovable property has become absolute the Court shall grant a 
certificate specifying the property sold and the name of the person who at the time of sale 
is declared to be the purchaser. Such certificate shall bear date the day on which the sale  
became absolute.  
95. Where the immovable property sold is in the occupancy of the judgment -debtor or of 
some person on his behalf or of some person claiming under a title created by the 
judgment debtor subsequently to the attachment of such property and a  certificate in 
respect thereof has been granted under rule 94 the Court shall on the application of the 
purchaser order delivery to be made by putting such purchaser or any person whom he 
may appoint to receive delivery on his behalf in possession of the property and if need be 
by removing any person who refuses to vacate the same.  

96. Where the property sold is in the occupancy of a tenant or other person entitled to 
occupy the same and a certificate in respect thereof has been granted under rule 94, the 
Court shall, on the application of the purchaser order delivery to be made by affixing a 
copy of the certificate of sale in some conspicuous place on the property and proclaiming 
to the occupant by beat of drum or other customary mode, at some convenient p lace that 
the interest of judgment debtor has been transferred to the purchaser.  
Resistance to Delivery of Possession to Decree -holder  
Or Purchaser  
97.- (1) Where the holder of a decree for the possession of immovable property or the 
purchaser of any such property sold in execution of a decree is resisted or obstructed by 
any person in obtaining possession of the property he may make an application to the 
Court complaining of such resistance or obstruction.  
(2) The Court shall fix a day for investigating th e matter and shall summon the party 
against whom the application is made to appear and answer the same.  
98. Where the Court is satisfied that the resistance or obstruction was occasioned without 
any just cause by the judgment -debtor or by some other person  at his instigation it shall 
direct that the applicant be put into possession of the property and where the applicant is 
still resisted or obstructed in obtaining possession the Court may also at the instance of 
the applicant order the judgment -debtor or a ny person acting at his instigation to be 
detained in […..] prison for a term which may extend to thirty days.  
99. Where the Court is satisfied that the resistance or obstruction was occasioned by any 
person (other than the judgment -debtor) claiming in goo d faith to be in possession of the 
property on his own account or on account of some person other than the judgment -
debtor the Court shall make an order dismissing the application.  
 
100.- (1) Where any person other than the judgment -debtor is dispossessed of immovable 
property by the holder of a decree for the possession of such property or where such 
property has been sold in execution of a decree by the purchaser thereof he may make an 
application to the Court complaining of such dispossession.  
(2) The Co urt shall fix a day for investigating the matter and shall summon the party 
against whom the application is made to appear and answer the same.  
101. Where the Court is satisfied that the applicant was in possession of the property on 
his own account or on account of some person other than the judgement -debtor it shall 
direct that the applicant be put into possession of the property.  
102. Nothing in rules 99 and 101 shall apply to resistance or obstruction in execution of a 
decree for the possession of immov able property by a person to whom the judgment -

debtor has transferred the property after the institution of the suit in which the decree was 
passed or to the dispossession of any such person.  
[103. - All questions arising as to title, right or interest in or possession of immovable 
property between an applicant under rule 97 and the opposite -party or between an 
applicant under rule 100 and the opposite party shall be adjudicated upon and determined 
by the Court and no separate suit shall lie for the determi nation of any such matter.]  
 
ORDER  XXII  
 
DEATH, MARRIAGE AND INSOLVENCY OF PARTIES  
1. The death of plaintiff or defendant shall not cause the suit to abate if the right to sue 
survives.  
2. Where there are more plaintiffs or defendants than one, and any of them dies, and 
where the right to sue survives to the surviving plaintiffs or plaintiffs alone or against the 
surviving defendant or defendants alone the Court shall cause an entry to that effect to be 
made on the record and the suit shall proceed at the i nstance of the surviving plaintiff or 
plaintiffs or against the surviving defendant or defendants.  
3. - (1) Where one of two or more plaintiffs dies and the right to sue does not survive to 
the surviving plaintiffs alone; [or on receipt of an intimation of  the death of such plaintiff 
from the person nominated by him for that purpose under rule 26, Order VII or a sole 
plaintiff or sole surviving plaintiff dies and the right to sue survives the Court on an 
application made in that behalf shall cause the legal  representative of the deceased 
plaintiff to be made a party and shall proceed with the suit.  
[(2) Where within the time allowed by law no application is made or intimation is given 
under sub -rule (I), the Court may proceed with the suit and any order made  or judgment 
pronounced in such suit shall notwithstanding the death of such plaintiff have the same 
force and effect as if it had been made or pronounced before the death took place.]  
4.- (1) Where one of two or more defendants dies and the right to sue d oes not survive 
against the surviving defendant or defendants alone [or on receipt of an intimation of the 
death of such defendant from the person nominated by him for that purpose under rule 
13, Order VIII] or a sole defendant or sole surviving defendant dies and the right to sue 
survives the Court on an application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal 
representative of the deceased defendant to made a party and shall proceed with the suit.  
(2) Any person so made a party may make any defence appropri ate to his character as 
legal representative of the deceased defendant.  
[(3) When within the time limited by law no application is made or intimation is given 
under sub -rule (1) the Court may proceed with the suit and any order made or judgment 

pronounced in such suit shall notwithstanding the death of such defendant have the same 
force and effect as if it had been pronounced before the death took place.]  
[(4) It shall not be necessary to substitute the legal representatives of any such defendant 
who has fa iled to file a written statement or has failed to appear and contest the suit at the 
hearing; and judgment may in such case be pronounced against the said defendant 
notwithstanding his death and such judgment shall have the same force and effect as if 
had been pronounced before his death took place.]  
5. Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the legal representative of 
a deceased plaintiff or a deceased defendant such question shall be determined by the 
Court.  
6. Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in the foregoing rules, whether the cause of action 
survives or not, there shall be no abatement by reason of the death of either party between 
the conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncing of the judgment, but judgment may in 
such case b e pronounced notwithstanding death and shall have the same force and effect 
as if it had been pronounced before the death took place.  
7. - (1) The marriage of a female plaintiff or defendant shall not cause the suit to abate 
but the suit may notwithstandin g be proceeded with to judgment and where the decree is 
against a female defendant it may be executed against her alone.  
(2) Where the husband is by law liable for the debts of his wife the decree may with the 
permission of the |court be executed against t he husband also; and in case of judgment for 
the wife execution of the decree may with such permission, be issued upon the 
application of the husband where the husband is by law entitled to the subject -matter of 
the decree.  
8. - (1) The insolvency of a pla intiff in any suit which the assignee or receiver might 
maintain for the benefit of his creditors, shall not cause the suit to abate unless such 
assignee or receiver declines to continue the suit or (unless for any special reason the 
Court otherwise direct s) to give security for the costs thereof within such time as the 
Court may direct.  
(2) Where the assignee or receiver neglects or refuses to continue the suit and to give 
such security within the time so ordered the defendant may apply for the dismissal o f the 
suit on the ground of the plaintiff's insolvency and the Court may make an order 
dismissing the suit and awarding to the defendant the costs which he has incurred in 
defending the same to be proved as a debt against the plaintiff's estate.  
9. - (1) W hen a suit is dismissed under rule 8 no fresh suit shall be brought on the same 
cause of action.  
(2) Any person claiming to be the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or defendant 
or the assignee or the receiver in the case of an insolvent [plaint iff may apply to the Court 

for setting aside any order made or judgment pronounced by it in his absence; and if it is 
proved that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from continuing the suit or 
defending the suit as the case may be the Court shall set  aside the order or the judgment 
upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.]  
[(3) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908) shall apply to 
applications under sub -rule (2).]  
10. - (1) In other cases of an assignm ent, creation or devolution of any interest during the 
pendency of a suit the suit may, by leave of the Court be continued by or against the 
person to or upon whom such interest has come or devolved.  
(2) The attachment of a decree pending an appeal therefr om shall be deemed to be an 
interest entitling the person who procured such attachment to the benefit of sub -rule (1).  
11. In the application of this Order to appeals so far as may be the word "Plaintiff" shall 
be held to include an appellant the word "def endant" a respondent and the word "suit" an 
appeal.  
12. Nothing in rules 3, 4 and 8 shall apply to proceedings in execution of a decree or 
order.  
 
ORDER XXIII  
WITHDRAWAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF SUITS  
1. -(1) At any time after the institution of a suit the plaint iff may as against all or any of 
the defendants withdraw his suit or abandon part of his claim.  
(2) Where the Court is satisfied - 
a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect or  
b) that there are other sufficient grounds for allowing the plain tiff to institute a fresh suit 
for the subject -matter of a suit or part of a claim,  
it may, on such terms as it thinks fit, grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such 
suit or abandon such part of a claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the 
subject matter of such suit or such part of a claim.  
(3) Where the plaintiff withdraws from a suit or abandons part of a claim without the 
permission referred to in sub -rule (2), he shall be liable for such costs as the Court may 
award and s hall be precluded from instituting any fresh suit in respect of such subject -
matter or such part of the claim.  

(4) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to permit one of several 
plaintiffs to withdraw without the consent of the others . 
2. In any fresh suit instituted on permission granted under the last preceding rule the 
plaintiff shall be bound by the law of limitation in the same manner as if the first suit had 
not been instituted.  
3. Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Co urt that a suit has been adjusted wholly 
or in part by any lawful agreement or compromise or where the defendant satisfies the 
plaintiff in respect of the whole or any part of the subject -matter of the suit the Court 
shall order such agreement compromise o r satisfaction to be recorded and shall pass a 
decree in accordance therewith so far as it relates to the suit.  
4. Nothing in this Order shall apply to any proceedings in execution of a decree or order.  
 
ORDER XXIV  
PAYMENT INTO COURT  
 
1. The defendant in a ny suit to recover a debt or damages may at any stage of the suit 
deposit in Court such sum of money as he considers a satisfaction in full of the claim.  
2. Notice of the deposit shall be given through the Court by the defendant to the plaintiff 
and the am ount of the deposit shall (unless the Court otherwise directs) be paid to the 
plaintiff on his application.  
3. No interest shall be allowed to the plaintiff on any sum deposited by the defendant 
from the date of the receipt of such notice whether the sum d eposited is in full of the 
claim or falls short thereof.  
4. - (1) Where the plaintiff accepts such amount as satisfaction in part only of his claim, 
he may prosecute his suit for the balance; and if the court decides that the deposit by the 
defendant was a  full satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim the plaintiff shall pay the costs of 
the suit incurred after the deposit and the costs incurred previous thereto so far as they 
were caused by excess in the plaintiff's claim.  
(2) |Where the plaintiff accepts suc h amount as satisfaction in full of his claim he shall 
present to the Court a statement to that effect and such statement shall be filed and the 
Court shall pronounce judgment accordingly and in directing by whom the costs of each 
party are to be paid the Court shall consider which of the parties is most to blame for the 
litigation.  
Illustrations  

 
a) A owes B Rs.100 . B sues A for the amount, having made no demand for payment and 
having no reason to believe that the delay caused by making a demand would pla ce him 
at a disadvantage. On the plaint being filed, A pays the money into Court. B accepts it in 
full satisfaction of his claim, but the Court should not allow him any costs, the litigation 
being presumably groundless on his part.  
b) B sues A under the ci rcumstances mentioned in Illustration (a). On the plaint being 
filed A disputes the claim. Afterwards A pays the money into Court. B accepts it in full 
satisfaction of his claim. The Court should also give B his costs of suit, A's conduct 
having shown that  the litigation was necessary.  
c) A owes B Rs 100, and is willing to pay him that sum without suit. B claims Rs.150 and 
sues A for that amount. On the plain being filed A pays Rs.100 into Court and disputes 
only his liability to pay the remaining Rs.50. B accepts the Rs.100 in full satisfaction of 
his claim. The Court should order him to pay A's costs.  
 
ORDER XXV  
SECURITY FOR COSTS  
1.- (1) Where at any stage of a suit it appears to the Court that a sole plaintiff is, or (when 
there are more plaintiffs than one) that all the plaintiffs are residing out of [Pakistan] and 
that such plaintiff does not or that no one of such plaintiffs does possess any sufficient 
immovable property within [Pakistan] other than the property in suit the Court may, 
either of its own  motion or on the application of any defendant, order the plaintiff or 
plaintiffs, within a time fixed by it, to give security for the payment of all costs incurred 
and likely to be incurred by any defendant.  
(2) Whoever leaves [Pakistan] under such circum stances as to afford reasonable 
probability that he will not be forthcoming whenever he may be called upon topay costs 
shall be deemed to be residing out of [Pakistan] within the meaning of sub -rule (1).  
(3) On the application of any defendant in a suit fo r the payment of money, in which the 
plaintiff is a woman, the Court may at any stage of the suit make a like order if it is 
satisfied that such plaintiff does not possess any sufficient immovable property within 
[Pakistan].  
2.- (1) In the event of such se curity not being furnished within the time fixed, the Court 
shall make an order dismissing the suit unless the plaintiff or plaintiffs are permitted to 
withdraw therefrom.  
(2) Where a suit is dismissed under this rule, the plaintiff may apply for an order to set 
the dismissal aside, and,. If it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he was 
prevented by any sufficient cause from furnishing the security within the time allowed, 

the Court shall set aside the dismissal upon such terms as to security, c osts or otherwise 
as is thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  
(3) The dismissal shall not be set aside unless notice of such application has been served 
on the defendant.  
ORDER XXVI  
COMMISSIONS  
Commissions to Examine Witnesses  
 
1. Any court may in any suit issue a commission for the examination on interrogatories or 
otherwise of any person resident within the local limits of its jurisdiction who is 
exempted under this Code from attending the Court or who is from sickness or infir mity 
unable to attend it.  
2. An order for the issue of a commission for the examination of a witness may be made 
by the Court either of its own motion or on the application, supported by affidavit or 
otherwise, of any party to the suit or of the witness to  be examined.  
3. A commission for the examination of a person who resides within the local limits of 
the jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same may be issued to any person whom the 
Court thinks fit to execute it.  
4.-(1) Any Court may in any suit issue a commission for the examination of - 
a) any person resident beyond the local limits of its jurisdiction;  
b) any person who is about to leave such limits before the date on which he is required to 
be examined in Court; and  
c) [any person in the service of the [State] ] who cannot, in the opinion of the Court, 
attend without detriment to the public service.  
(2) Such commission may be issued to any Court, not being a High Court, within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction such person resides, or to any plea der or other person 
whom the Court issuing the commission may appoint.  
(3) The Court on issuing any commission under this rule shall direct whether the 
commission shall be returned to itself or to any subordinate Court.  
5. Where any Court to which applicat ion is made for the issue of commission for the 
examination of a person residing at any place not within[Pakistan] is satisfied that the 
evidence of such person is necessary, the Court may issue such commission or a letter of 
request.  

6. Every Court receiv ing a commission for the examination of any person shall examine 
him or cause him to be examined pursuant thereto.  
7. Where a commission has been duly executed it shall be returned, together with the 
evidence taken under it, to the Court from which it was issued, unless the order for 
issuing the commission has otherwise directed, in which case the commission shall be 
returned in terms of such order; and the commission and the return thereto and the 
evidence taken under it shall (subject to the provisions of  the next following rule) form 
part of the record of the suit.  
8. Evidence taken under a commission shall not be read as evidence in the suit without 
the consent of the party against whom the same is offered unless - 
a) the person who gave the evidence is b eyond the jurisdiction of the Court, or dead or 
unable from sickness or infirmity to attend to be personally examined, or exempted from 
personal appearance in Court, or is a [person in the service of the [State]] who cannot, in 
the opinion of the Court att end without detriment to the public service, or  
b) the Court in its discretion dispenses with the proof of any of the circumstances 
mentioned in clause (a) and authorizes the evidence of any person being read as evidence 
in the suit, notwithstanding proof that the cause for taking such evidence by commission 
has ceased at the time of reading the same.  
Commissions for Local Investigations  
9. In any suit in which the Court deems a local investigation to be requisite or proper for 
the purpose of elucidating an y matter in dispute, or of ascertaining the market -value of 
any property, or the amount or any mesne profits or damages or annual net profits, the 
Court may issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to make such 
investigation and to report thereon to the Court:  
Provided that, where the [Provincial Government] has made rules as to the persons to 
whom such commission shall be issued, the Court shall be bound by such rules.  
10.-(1) The Commissioner, after such local inspection as he deem s necessary and after 
reducing to writing the evidence taken by him, shall return such evidence, together with 
his report in writing signed by him to the Court.  
(2) The report of the Commissioner and the evidence taken by him (but ot the evidence 
without t he report) shall be evidence in the suit and shall form part of the record; but the 
Court or, with the permission of the Court, any of the parties to the suit may examine the 
Commissioner personally in open Court touching any of the matters referred to him  or 
mentioned in his report, or as to his report, or as to the manner in which he has made the 
investigation.  
(3) Where the Court is for any reason dissatisfied with the proceedings of the 
Commissioner, it may direct such further inquiry to be made as it s hall think fit.  

Commission to examine Accounts  
11. In any suit in which an examination or adjustment of accounts is necessary, the Court 
may issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to make such 
examination or adjustment.  
12.-(1) Th e Court shall furnish the Commissioner with such part of the proceedings and 
such instructions as appear necessary and the instructions shall distinctly specify whether 
the Commissioner is merely to transmit the proceedings which he may hold on the 
inquiry , or also to report his own opinion on the point referred for his examination.  
(2) The proceedings and report (if any) of the Commissioner shall be evidence in the suit, 
but where the Court has reason to be dissatisfied with them, it may direct such furthe r 
inquiry as it shall think fit.  
Commissions to make Partitions  
13. Where a preliminary decree for partition has been passed, the Court may, in any case 
not provided for by section 54, issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit to make 
the partitio n or separation according to the rights as declared in such decree.  
14.- (1) The Commissioner shall, after such inquiry as may be necessary, divide the 
property into as many shares as may be directed by the order under which the 
commission was issued, and shall allot such shares to the parties, and may, if authorised 
thereto by the said order, award sums to be paid for the purpose of equalizing the value of 
the shares.  
(2) The Commissioner shall then prepare and sign a report or the Commissioners(where 
the commission was issued to more than one person and they cannot agree) shall prepare 
and sign separate reports appointing the share of each party and distinguishing each share 
(if so directed by the said order) by metes and bounds. Such report or reports sha ll be 
annexed to the commission and transmitted to the Court; and the Court, after hearing any 
objections which the parties may make to the report or reports, shall confirm, vary or set 
aside the same.  
(3) Where the Court confirms or varies the report or r eports it shall pass a decree in 
accordance with the same as confirmed or varied; but where the Court sets aside the 
report or reports it shall either issue a new commission or make such other order as it 
shall think fit.  
 
General Provisions  
15. Before iss uing any commission under this Order, the Court may order such sum (if 
any) as it thinks reasonable for the expenses of the commission to be, within a time to be 

fixed paid into Court by the party at whose instance or for whose benefit the commission 
is issued.  
16. Any commissioner appointed under this Order may, unless otherwise directed by the 
order of appointment, - 
a) examine the parties themselves and any witness whom they or any of them may 
produce, and any other person whom the Commissioner thinks pro per to call upon to give 
evidence in the matter referred to him;  
b) call for and examine documents and other things relevant to the subject of inquiry;  
c) at any reasonable time enter upon or into any land or building mentioned in the order.  
17.- (1) The p rovisions of this Code relating to the summoning, attendance and 
examination of witnesses, and to the remuneration of, and penalties to be imposed upon, 
witnesses, shall apply to persons required to give evidence or to produce documents 
under this Order wh ether the commission in execution of which they are so required has 
been issued by a Court situate within or by a Court situate beyond the limits of [Pakistan] 
and for the purpose of this rule the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil Court.  
(2) A Com missioner may apply to any Court (not being a High Court) within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction a witness resides for the issue of any process which he may 
find it necessary to issue to or against such witness, and such Court may, in its discretion , 
issue such process a sit considers reasonable and proper.  
18.- (1) Where a commission is issued under this Order, the Court shall direct that the 
parties to the suit shall appear before the Commissioner in person or by their agents or 
pleaders.  
(2) Where  all or any of the parties do not so appear, the Commissioner may proceed in 
their absence.  
[Commissions issued at the instance of Foreign Tribunals.  
 
19.- (1) If a High Court is satisfied - 
a) that a foreign Court situated in a foreign country wishes to o btain the evidence of a 
witness in any proceeding before it,  
b) that the proceeding is of a civil nature, and  
c) that the witness is residing within the limits of the High Court's appellate jurisdiction.  
It may, subject to the provisions of rule 20, issue a commission for the examination of 
such witness.  
(2) Evidence may be given of the matters specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub -rule 
(1)- 

a) by a certificate signed by the consular officer of the foreign country of the highest rank 
in [Pakistan] an d transmitted to the High Court through the [Central Government], or  
b) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and transmitted to the High Court 
through the [Central Government] or  
c) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and produ ced before the High Court 
by a party to the proceeding.  
20. The High Court may issue a commission under rule 19 - 
a) upon application by a party to the proceeding before the foreign Court or  
b) upon an application by a law officer of the [Provincial Govern ment] acting under 
instructions from the [Provincial Government].  
21. A commission under rule 19 may be issued to any Court within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction the witness resides, or, where *** the witness resides within the local 
limits of [the  ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court], to any person whom 
the Court thinks fit to execute the commission.  
21. The provisions of rules 6, 15, 16, 17 and 18 of this Order in so far as they are 
applicable shall apply to the issue, execution  and return of such commissions, and when 
any such commission has been duly executed it shall be returned, together with the 
evidence taken under it, to the High Court, which shall forward it to the [Central 
Government] along with the letter or request for  transmission to the foreign Court].  
 
ORDER XXVII  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST [THE [GOVERNMENT]] OR PUBLIC OFFICERS  
IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY  
 
1. In any suit by or against [the [Government]], the plaint or written statement shall be 
signed by such person as [the [Government]] may, by general or special order, appoint in 
this behalf, and shall be verified by any person whom [ the [Government]] may so 
appoint and who is acquainted with the facts of the case.  
2. Persons being ex officio or other wise authorised to ac t for [the [Government]] in 
respect of any judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom 
appearances, acts and applications under this Code maybe made or done on behalf of 
[the[Government]].  
3. In suits by or [against the [Governm ent]] instead of inserting in the plaint the name and 
description and place of residence of the plaintiff or defendant, it shall be sufficient to 
insert [the appropriate name as provided in section 79, ***].  

[4. The Government] pleader in any Court shall b e the agent of the [Government] for the 
purpose of receiving processes against the [Government] issued by such |Court.]  
5. The Court, in fixing the day for [the [Government]] to answer to the plaint, shall allow 
a reasonable time for the necessary communic ation[with the [Government]] through the 
proper channel, and for the issue of instructions to the [[Government] pleader] to appear 
and answer on behalf of [the [Government]] *** and may extend the time at its 
discretion.  
6. The Court may also, in any case in which the [ [ Government] pleader] is not 
accompanied by any person on the part of [the [Government]] who may be able to answer 
any material questions relating to the suit, direct the attendance of such a person.  
7.- (1) Where the defendant is a public officer and, on receiving the summons, considers 
it proper to make a reference to [the [Government]] before answering the plaint, he may 
apply to the Court to grant such extension of the time fixed in the summons as may be 
necessary to enable him to make s uch reference and to receive orders thereon through the 
proper channel.  
(2) Upon such application the court shall extend the time for so long as appears to it to be 
necessary.  
8.- (1) Where [the [government]] undertakes the defence of a suit against a publ ic officer 
[the Government] pleader], upon being furnished with authority to appear and answer the 
plaint, shall apply to the Court, and upon such application the Court shall cause a note of 
his authority to be entered in the register of civil suits.  
(2) W here no application under sub -rule (1) is made by [the [Government] pleader] on or 
before the day fixed in the notice for the defendant to appear and answer, the case shall 
proceed as in a suit between private parties:  
Provided that the defendant shall not  be liable to arrest, nor his property to attachment 
otherwise than in execution of a decree.  
8.A. No such security as is mentioned in rules 5 and 6 of Order XLI shall be required 
from the [Government] or where the [Government] has undertaken the defence o f the 
suit, from any public officer sued in respect of an act alleged to be done by him in his 
official capacity.  
8B. In this Order "[Government]" and "[Government] pleader" means respectively - 
a) in relation to any suit by or against *** the Central Gover nment, or against a public 
officer in the service of that Government, the Central Government and such pleader as 
that Government may appoint whether generally or specially for the purposes of this 
Order:  
b) * * * * * * * * * *  
c) in relation to any suit by  or against a Provincial Government or against a public officer 

in the service of a Province, the Provincial Government and the Government pleader, or 
such other pleader as the Provincial Government may appoint, whether generally or 
specially for the purpo ses of this Order.]  
 
[ORDER XXVIIA  
SUITS INVOLVING ANYSUBSTANTIAL QUESTION AS TO THE  
INTERPRETATION OF CONSTITIONAL LAW  
1. In any suit in which it appears to the Court that [ any substantial question as to the 
interpretation of constitutional law] is invol ved, the Court shall not proceed to determine 
the question until after notice has been given to the [Attorney -General for Pakistan] if the 
question of law concerns the Central Government and to the Advocate -General of the 
Province if the question of law co ncerns a Provincial Government.  
2. The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order that the Central Government or a 
provincial Government shall be added as a defendant in any suit involving [any 
substantial question as to the interpretation of constitu tional law] if the [Attorney -General 
for Pakistan] or the Advocate -General of the Province as the case may be, whether upon 
receipt of notice under rule 1, or otherwise applies for such addition and the Court is 
satisfied that such addition is necessary or  desirable for the satisfactory determination of 
the question of law involved.  
3. Where under rule 2 Government is added as a defendant in a suit [the Attorney -
General] the Advocate General or the Government shall not be entitled to or liable for 
costs in the Court which ordered the addition unless the Court having regard to all the 
circumstances of the case for any special reason otherwise orders .  
4. In the application of this Order to appeals the word " defendant" shall be held to 
include a respondent an d the word "suit" an appeal.  
 
ORDER XXVIII  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST MILITARY [OR NAVAL]MEN [OR AIRMEN]  
 
1. - (1) Where any officer, [soldier, sailor or airman] actually [in the service of the State] 
in [such] capacity is a party to a suit, and cannot obtain lea ve of absence for the purpose 
of prosecuting or defending the suit in person, he may authorise any person to sue or 
defend in his stead.  
(2) The authority shall be in writing and shall be signed by the officer, [soldier, sailor or 
airman] in the presence o f (a) his commanding officer, or he next subordinate officer, if 
the party is himself the commanding officer, or (b) where the officer, [soldier, sailor or 
airman] is serving in military [naval] [or air force] staff employment, the head or other 

superior o fficer of the office in which he is employed. Such commanding or other officer 
shall counter sign the authority which shall be filed in Court.  
(3) When so filed the countersignature shall be sufficient proof that he authority was duly 
executed, and that th e officer, [soldier, sailor or airman] by whom it was granted could 
not obtain leave of absence for the purpose of prosecuting or defending the suit in person.  
Explanation - In this Order the expression "commanding officer" means the officer in 
actual comm and for the time being of any regiment, corps, [ship] detachment or depot to 
which the officer, [soldier, sailor or airman] belongs.  
2. Any person authorised by an officer, [soldier, sailor or airman] to prosecute or defend a 
suit in his stead may prosecut e or defend it in person in the same manner as the officer, 
[soldier, sailor or airman] could do if present; or he may appoint a pleader to prosecute or 
defend the suit on behalf of such officer, [soldier, sailor or airman].  
3. Processes served upon any pe rson authorised by an officer, [soldier, sailor or airman] 
under rule 1 or upon any pleader appointed as aforesaid by such person shall be as 
effectual as if they had been served on the party in person.  
ORDER XXIX  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST CORPORATIONS  
 
1. In su its by or against a corporation, any pleading may be signed and verified on behalf 
of the corporation by the secretary or by any director or other principal officer of the 
corporation who is able to depose to the facts of the case.  
2. Subject to any statut ory provision regulating service of process, where the suit is 
against a corporation the summons may be served - 
a) on the secretary, or on any director, or other principal officer of the corporation , or  
b) by leaving it or sending it by post addressed to  the corporation at the registered office, 
or if there is no registered office then at the place where the corporation carries on 
business.  
3. The Court may, at any stage of the suit, require the personal appearance of the 
secretary or of any director, or other principal officer of the corporation who may be able 
to answer material questions relating to the suit.  
ORDER XXX  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST FIRMS AND PERSONS CARRYING ON  
BUSINESS IN NAMES OTHER THAN THEIR OWN  

 
1.- (1) Any two or more persons claiming or be ing liable as partners and carrying on 
business in [Pakistan] may sue or be sued in the name of firm (if any) of which such 
persons were partners at the time of the accruing of the cause of action and any party to a 
suit may in such case apply to the Court  for a statement of the names and addresses of the 
persons who were at the time of the accruing of the cause of action partners in such firm, 
to be furnished and verified in such manner as the Court may direct.  
(2) Where persons sue on sued as partners in the name of their firm under sub -rule (1) it 
shall in the case of any pleading or other document required by or under this Code to be 
signed verified or certified by the plaintiff or the defendant suffice if such pleading or 
other document is signed, verif ied or certified by any one of such persons.  
2.- (1) Where a suit is instituted by partners in the name of their firm, the plaintiffs or 
their pleader shall, on demand in writing by or on behalf of any defendant, forthwith 
declare in writing the names and places of residence of all the persons constituting a firm 
on whose behalf the suit is instituted.  
(2) Where the plaintiffs or their pleader fail to comply with any demand made under sub -
rule (1) all proceedings in the suit may upon an application for that  purpose, be stayed 
upon such terms as the Court may direct.  
(3) Where the names of the partners are declared in the manner referred to in sub -rule (1), 
the suit shall proceed in the same manner, and the same consequences in all respects shall 
follow, as i f they had been named as plaintiffs in the plaint:  
Provided that all the proceedings shall nevertheless continue in the name of the firm.  
3. Where persons are sued as partners in the name of their firm, the summons shall be 
served either - 
a) upon any one or more of the partners, or  
b) at the principal place at which the partnership business is carried on within [Pakistan] 
upon any person having, at the time of service, the control or management of the 
partnership business there,  
as the Court may direct; an d such service shall be deemed good service upon the firm so 
sued, whether all or any of the partners are within or without [Pakistan]:  
Provided that, in the case of a partnership which has been dissolved to the knowledge of 
the plaintiff before the instit ution of the suit, the summons shall be served upon every 
person within [Pakistan] whom it is sought to make liable.  
4. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of the Contract Act, 1872, 
where two or more persons may sue or be sued in the na me of a firm under the foregoing 
provisions and any of such persons dies, whether before the institution or during the 

pendency of any suit, it shall not be necessary to join the legal representative of the 
deceased as a party to the suit.  
(2) Nothing in s ub-rule (1) shall limit or otherwise affect any right which the legal 
representative of the deceased may have - 
a) to apply to be made a party to the suit, or  
b) to enforce any claim against the survivor or survivors.  
5. Where a summons is issued to a firm  and is served in the manner provided by rule 3, 
every person upon whom it is served shall be informed by notice in writing given at the 
time of such service, whether he is served as a partner or as a person having the control or 
management of the partners hip business, or in both characters, and in default of such 
notice, the person served shall be deemed to be served as a partner.  
6. Where persons are sued as partners in the name of their firm, they shall appear 
individually in their own names, but all sub sequent proceedings shall, nevertheless 
continue in the names of the firm.  
7. Where a summons is served in the manner provided by rule 3 upon a person having the 
control or management of the partnership business no appearance by him shall be 
necessary unle ss he is a partner of the firm sued.  
8. Any person served with summons as a partner under rule 3 may appear under protest, 
denying that he is a partner, but such appearance shall not preclude the plaintiff from 
otherwise serving a summons on the firm and o btaining a decree against the firm in 
default of appearance where no partner has appeared.  
9. This Order shall apply to suits between a firm and one or more of the partners therein 
and to suits between firms having one or more partners in common; but no ex ecution 
shall be issued in such suits except by leave of the Court and on an application for leave 
to issue such execution, all such accounts and inquiries may be directed to be taken and 
made and directions given as may be just.  
10. Any person carrying on  business in a name or style other than his own name may be 
sued in such name or style as if it were a firm name; and so far as the nature of the case 
will permit, all rules under this Order shall apply.  
 
ORDER XXXI  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST TRUSTEES, EXECUTORS AND  
ADMINISTRATORS  
 
1. In all suits concerning property vested in a trustee, executor or administrator, where the 
contention is between the persons beneficially interested in such property and a third 

person, the trustee, executor or administrator shall re present the person so interested, and 
it shall not ordinarily be necessary to make them parties to the suit. But the Court may, if 
it thinks fit, order them or any of them to be made parties.  
2. Where there are several trustees, executors or administrators  they shall all be made 
parties to a suit against one or more of them:  
Provided that the executors who have not proved their testator's will, and trustees 
executors and administrators outside [Pakistan] need not be made parties.  
3. Unless the Court directs  otherwise the husband of a married trustee, administratrix or 
executrix shall not as such be a party to a suit by or against her.  
ORDER XXXII  
SUITS BY OR AGAINST MINORS AND PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND  
 
1. Every suit by a minor shall be instituted in his name by a person who in such suit shall 
be called the next friend of the minor.  
2. - (1) Where a suit is instituted by or on behalf of a minor without a next friend, the 
defendant may apply to have the plaint taken off the file, with costs to us paid by the 
pleader or other person by whom it was presented.  
(2) Notice of such application shall be given to such person and the Court after hearing 
his objections (if any) may make such order in the matter as it thinks fit.  
3.- (1) Where the defendant is a minor, the Court on being satisfied of the fact of his 
minority shall appoint a proper person to be guardian for the suit for such minor.  
(2) An order for the appointment of a guardian for the suit may be obtained upon 
application in the name and on behalf of the min or or by the plaintiff.  
 
(3) Such application shall be supported by an affidavit verifying the fact that the proposed 
guardian has no interest in the matters in controversy in the suit adverse to that of the 
minor and that he is a fit person to be so appoi nted.  
(4) No order shall be made on any application under this rule except upon notice to minor 
and to any guardian of the minor appointed or declared by an authority competent in that 
behalf, or, where there is no such guardian upon notice to the father o r other natural 
guardian of the minor, or, where there is no father or other natural guardian, to the person 
in whose case the minor is, and after hearing any objection which may be urged on behalf 
of any person served with notice under the sub -rule. 

[(5) A person appointed under sub -rule (1) to be guardian for the suit for a minor shall, 
unless his appointment is terminated by retirement, removal or death, continues as such 
throughout all proceedings arising out of the suit including proceedings in any app ellate 
or revisional Court and any proceedings in the execution of a decree.]  
4. - (1) Any person who is of sound mind and has attained majority may act as next friend 
of a minor or as his guardian for the suit:  
Provided that the interest of such person i s not adverse to that of the minor and that of the 
minor and that he is not, in the case of a next friend, a defendant or, in the case of a 
guardian for the suit, a plaintiff.  
(2) Where a minor has a guardian appointed or declared by competent authority, n o 
person other than such guardian shall act as the next friend of the minor or be appointed 
his guardian for the suit unless the Court considers for reasons to be recorded, that it is 
for the minor's welfare that another person be permitted to act or be ap pointed, as the case 
may be.  
(3) No person shall without his consent be appointed guardian for the suit.  
(4) Where there is no other person fit and willing to act as guardian for the suit, the Court 
may appoint any of its officers to be such guardian, and may direct that the costs to be 
incurred by such officer in the performance of his duties as such guardian shall be borne 
either by the parties or by any one or more of the parties to the suit, or out of any fund in 
Court in which the minor is interested, and may give directions for the repayment or 
allowance of such costs as justice and the circumstances of the case may require.  
5. - (1) Every application to the Court on behalf of a minor, other than an application 
under rule 10, sub -rule (2) shall be made  by his next friend or by his guardian for the suit.  
(2) Every order made in a suit or on any application before the Court in or by which a 
minor is in any way concerned or affected, without such minor being represented by a 
next friend or guardian for the  suit, as the case may be, may be discharged and, where the 
pleader of the party at whose instance such order was obtained knew, or might reasonably 
have known, the fact of such minority, with costs to be paid by such pleader.  
6.-(1) A next friend or guard ian for the suit shall not, without the leave of the Court 
receive any money or other movable property on behalf of a minor either - 
 
a) by way of compromise before decree or order or  
b) under a decree or order in favour of the minor.  
(2)Where the next frie nd or guardian for the suit has not been appointed or declared by 
competent authority to be guardian of the property of the minor, or, having been so 
appointed or declared, is under any disability known to the Court to receive the money or 
other movable pr operty the |Court shall if it grants him leave to receive the property 

require such security and give such directions as will in its opinion, sufficiently protect 
the property from waste and ensure its proper application.  
7.-(1) No next friend or guardian for the suit shall without the leave of the Court 
expressly recorded in the proceedings enter into any agreement or compromise on behalf 
of a minor with reference to the suit in which he acts as next friend or guardian.  
(2) Any such agreement or compromise  entered into without the leave of the Court so 
recorded shall be voidable against all parties other than the minor.  
8.-(1) Unless otherwise ordered by the Court a next friend shall not retire without first 
procuring a fit person to be put in his place and  giving security for the costs already 
incurred.  
(2) The application for the appointment of a new next friend shall be supported by an 
affidavit showing the fitness of the person proposed and also that he has no interest 
adverse to that of the minor.  
9. - (1) Where the interest of the next friend of a minor is adverse to that of the minor or 
where he is so connected with a defendant whose interest is adverse to that of the minor 
as to make it unlikely that the minor's interest will be properly protected by him, or where 
he does not do his duty, or, during the pendency of the suit, ceases to reside within [ 
Pakistan] or for any other sufficient cause application may be made on behalf of the 
minor or by a defendant for his removal; and the Court, if satisfied of the sufficiency of 
the cause assigned may order the next friend to be removed accordingly and make such 
other order as to costs as it thinks fit.  
(2) Where the next friend is not a guardian appointed or declared by an authority 
competent in this behalf and an application is made by a guardian so appointed or 
declared, who desires to be himself appointed in the place of the next friend, the Court 
shall remove the next friend unless it considers for reasons to be recorded by it that the 
guardian ought not to be appointed the next friend of the minor and shall thereupon 
appoint the applicant to be next friend in his place upon such terms as to the costs already 
incurred in the suit as it thinks fit.  
10. - (1) On the retirement removal or death of the next fr iend of a minor, further 
proceedings shall be stayed until the appointment of a next friend in his place.  
(2) Where the pleader of such minor omits within a reasonable time to take steps to get a 
new next friend appointed, any person interested in the mino r or in the matter in issue 
may apply to the Court for the appointment of one, and the Court may appoint such 
person as it thinks fit.  
11. - (1) Where the guardian for the suit desires to retire or does not do his duty, or where 
other sufficient ground is made to appear, the Court may permit such guardian to retire or 
may remove him, and may make such order as to costs as it thinks fit.  

(2) Where the guardian for the suit retires, dies or is removed by the Court during the 
pendency of the suit the Court sh all appoint a new guardian in his place.  
12. - (1) A minor plaintiff or a minor not a party to a suit on whose behalf an application 
is pending shall, on attaining majority, elect whether he will proceed with the suit or 
application.  
(2) Where he elects to  proceed with the suit or application be shall apply for an order 
discharging the next friend and for leave to proceed in his own name.  
(3) The title of the suit or application shall in such case be corrected so as to read 
henceforth: - 
"A. B., late a minor , by C.D., his next friend, but now having attained majority."  
(4) Where he elects to abandon the suit or application, he shall if a sole plaintiff or sole 
applicant, apply for an order to dismiss the suit or application on repayment of the costs 
incurred by the defendant or apposite -party or which may have been paid by his next 
friend.  
(5) Any application under this rule may be made ex parte: but no order discharging a next 
friend and permitting a minor plaintiff to proceed in his own name shall be made wi thout 
any notice to the next friend.  
13. - (1) Where a minor co -plaintiff on attaining majority desires to repudiate the suit, he 
shall apply to have his name struck out as co -plaintiff; and the Court, if it finds that he is 
not a necessary party shall dis miss him from the suit on such terms as to costs or 
otherwise as it thinks fit.  
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on the next friend on any co -plaintiff and on 
the defendant.  
(3) The costs of all parties of such application and of all or any pr oceedings theretofore 
had in the suit, shall be paid by such persons as the Court directs.  
(4) Where the applicant is a necessary party to the suit, the Court may direct him to be 
made a defendant.  
14. - (1) A minor on attaining majority may, if a sole pla intiff, apply that a suit instituted 
in his name by his next friend be dismissed on the ground that it was unreasonable or 
improper.  
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on all the parties concerned; and the Court 
upon being satisfied of such unre asonableness or impropriety, may grant the application 
and order the next friend to pay the costs of all parties in respect of the application and of 
anything done in the suit, or make such other order as it thinks fit.  

15. The provisions contained in rule s 1 to 14 so far as they are applicable, shall extend to 
persons adjudged to be of unsound mind and to persons who though not so adjudged are 
found by the Court in inquiry, by reason of unsoundness of mind or mental infirmity, to 
be incapable of protecting  their interests when suing or being sued.  
16. Nothing in this Order shall be construed to affect or in any way derogate from the 
provisions of any local law for the time being in force relating to suits by or against 
minors or by or against lunatics or ot her persons of unsound mind.  
ORDER XXXIII  
SUITS BY PAUPERS  
 
1. Subject to the following provisions, any suit may be instituted by a pauper.  
Explanation: - A person is a "pauper" when he is not possessed of sufficient means to 
enable him to pay the fee presc ribed by law for the plaint in such suit, or where no such 
fee is prescribed when he is not entitled to property worth [one thousand) rupees other 
than his necessary wearing apparel and the subject matter of the suit.  
2. Every application for permission to  sue as a pauper shall contain the particulars 
required in regard to plaints in suits a schedule of any movable or immovable property 
belonging to the applicant with the estimated value thereof shall be annexed thereto; and 
it shall be signed and verified in the manner prescribed for the signing and verification of 
pleadings.  
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the application shall be presented to 
the Court by the applicant in person unless he is exempted from appearing in Court, in 
which  case the application may be presented by an authorised agent who can answer all 
material questions relating to the application and who may be examined in the same 
manner as the party represented by him might have been examined had such party 
attended in p erson.  
4. - (1) Where the application is in proper form and duly presented the Court may if it 
thinks fit examine the applicant or his agent when the applicant is allowed to appear by 
agent regarding the merits of the claim and the property of the applican t. 
(2) Where the application is presented by an agent, the Court may if it thinks fit order that 
the applicant be examined by a commission in the manner in which the examination of an 
absent witness may be taken.  
5. The Court shall reject an application fo r permission to sue as a pauper - 
a) where it is not framed and presented in the manner prescribed by rules 2 and 3, or  
b) where the applicant is not a pauper, or  
c) where he has, within two months next before the presentation of the application, 

disposed of any property fraudulently or in order to be able to apply for permission to sue 
as a pauper, or  
d) where his allegations do not show a cause of action, or  
e) where he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject matter of the 
proposed su it under which any other person has obtained an interest in such subject 
matter.  
6. Where the Court sees no reason to reject the application on any of the grounds stated in 
rule, 5, it shall fix a day (of which at last ten days clear notice shall be given to the 
opposite party and the Government pleader) for receiving such evidence as the applicant 
may adduce in proof of his pauperism, and for hearing any evidence which may be 
adduced in disproof thereof.  
7. - (1) On the day so fixed or as soon thereafter a s may be convenient, the Court shall 
examine the witnesses (if any) produced by either party and may examine the applicant or 
his agent and shall make a memorandum of the substance of their evidence.  
(2) The Court shall also hear any argument which the par ties may desire to offer on the 
question whether, on the face of the application and of the evidence (if any) taken by the 
Court as herein provided, the applicant is or is not subject to any of the prohibitions 
specified in rule 5.  
(3) The Court shall then  either allow or refuse to allow the applicant to sue as a pauper.  
8. Where the application is granted it shall be numbered and registered, and shall be 
deemed the plaint in the suit, and the suit shall proceed in all other respects as a suit 
instituted in  the ordinary manner, except that plaintiff shall not be liable to pay any court -
fee (other than fee payable for service of process) in respect of any petition, appointment 
of a pleader or other proceeding connected with the suit.  
9. The Court may on the a pplication of the defendant or of the Government pleader of 
which seven days clear notice in writing has been given to the plaintiff order the plaintiff 
to be dispaupered - 
a) if he is guilty of vexatious or improper conduct in the course of the suit;  
b) if it appears that his means are such that he ought not to continue to sue as a pauper; or  
c) if he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject -matter of the suit 
under which any other person has obtained an interest in such subject matter.  
10.Where the plaintiff succeeds in the suit, the Court shall calculate the amount of court 
fees which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as a 
pauper; such amount shall be recoverable by the [Provincial Government] fro m any party 
ordered by the decree to pay the same, and shall be a first charge on the subject matter of 
the suit.  

11. Where the plaintiff fails in the suit or is dispaupered, or where the suit is withdrawn 
or dismissed, - 
a) because the summons for the def endant to appear and answer has not been served upon 
him in consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court fee or postal charges (if 
any) chargeable for such service, or  
b) because the plaintiff does not appear when the suit is called on for  hearing.  
The Court shall order the plaintiff, or any person added as a co -plaintiff to the suit, to pay 
the court fees which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to 
sue as a pauper.  
[11.-A. Where the suit abates by reason of the death of the plaintiff or of any person 
added as a co -plaintiff the Court shall order that the amount of court fees which would 
have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as a pauper shall be 
recoverable by the Provincial Gover nment from the estate of the deceased plaintiff.]  
12. The[Provincial Government shall have the right at any time to apply to the Court to 
make an order for the payment of court fees under rule 10 [rule 11 or rule 11 -A]. 
13. All matters arising between the [Provincial Government] and any party to the suit 
under rule 10, rule 11 [rule 11A] or rule 12 shall be deemed to be questions arising 
between the parties to the suit within the meaning of section 47.  
[14. Where an order is made under rule 10, rule 11 or r ule 11A the court shall forthwith 
cause a copy of the decree or order to be forwarded to the Collector, who may without 
prejudice to any other mode of recovery recover the amount of court fees specified 
therein from the person or property liable for the pa yment as if it were an arrear of land 
revenue.]  
15. An order refusing to allow the applicant to sue as a pauper shall be a bar to any 
subsequent application of the like nature by him in respect of the same right to sue; but 
the applicant shall be at libert y to institute a suit in the ordinary manner in respect of such 
right, provided that he first pays the costs, (if any) incurred by the [Provincial 
Government] and by the opposite party in opposing his application for leave to sue as a 
pauper.  
16. The costs  of an application for permission to sue as a pauper and of an inquiry into 
pauperism shall be costs in the suit.  
 
ORDER XXXIV  
SUITS RELATING TO MORTGAGES OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
 
1. Subject to the provisions of this Code, all persons having an interest eith er in the 

mortgage -security or in the right of redemption shall be joined as parties to any suit 
relating to the mortgage.  
Explanation: - A puisne mortgagee may sue for foreclosure or for sale without making 
the prior mortgagee a party to the suit; and a p rior mortgagee need not be joined in a suit 
to redeem a subsequent mortgage.  
[2. In a suit for foreclosure, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court shall pass a preliminary 
decree - 
a) Ordering that an account be taken of what was due to the plaintiff at the date of such 
decree for - 
i. principal and interest on the mortgage,  
ii. the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him and  
iii. other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by himup to that date in respect of 
his mortgage -security together with interes t thereon; or  
b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and  
c) directing - 
i. that, if the defendant pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before 
such date as the Court may fix within six months from the date on which the Court 
confi rms and countersigns the account taken under clause (a) or from the date on which 
such amount is declared in Court under clause (b) as the case may be, and thereafter pays 
such amount as may be adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges and 
expen ses as provided in rule 10, together with subsequent interest on such sums 
respectively as provided in rule 11 the plaintiff shall deliver up to the defendant or to 
such person as the defendant appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating 
to the mortgaged property, and shall, if so required, retransfer the property to the 
defendant at his cost free from the mortgage and from all encumbrances created by the 
plaintiff or any person claiming under him, or, where the plaintiff claims by derived t itle 
by those under whom he claims, and shall also if necessary put the defendant in 
possession of the property; and  
ii. that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the preliminary 
decree is not made on or before the date so fixed, or the defendant fails to pay within 
such time as the Court may fix, the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, 
charges, expenses and interest the plaintiff shall be entitled to apply for a final decree 
debarring the defendant from all right to r edeem the property.  
(2) The Court may on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from 
time to time, at any time before a final decree is passed, extend the time fixed for the 
payment of the amount found or declared due under sub -rule (1) or of the amount 
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges expenses and interest.  
(3) Where in a suit for foreclosure, subsequent mortgagees or persons deriving title from 
or subrogated to the rights of any such mortgagees are joined as parties the preliminary 

decree shall provide for the adjudication of the respective rights and liabilities of the 
parties to the suit in the manner and form set forth in Form No.9 or Form No.10, as the 
case may be of Appendix D with such variations as the circumst ances of the case may 
require.  
3. - (1) Where, before a final decree debarring the defendant from all right to redeem the 
mortgaged property has been passed, the defendant makes payment into Court of all 
amounts due from him under sub -rule (1) of rule 2, t he Court shall on application made 
by the defendant in this behalf, pass a final decree - 
a) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree,  
and if necessary, - 
b) ordering him to re -transfer at the cost of the def endant the mortgaged property as 
directed in the said decree,  
and also if necessary  
c) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of the property.  
(2) where payment in accordance with sub -rule (1) has not been made the Court shall on 
application made  by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final declaring that the defendant 
and all persons claiming through or under him are debarred from all right to redeem the 
mortgaged property and also, if necessary, ordering the defendant to put the plaintiff in 
possession of the property.  
(3) On the passing of a final decree under sub -rule (2) all liabilities to which the 
defendant is subject in respect of the mortgage or on account of the suit shall be deemed 
to have been discharged.  
4- (1) In a suit for sale if t he plaintiff succeeds the Court shall pass a preliminary decree 
to the effect mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) (I) of sub rule (1) of rule 2, and further 
directing that, in default of the defendant paying as therein mentioned the plaintiff shall 
be en titled to apply for a final decree directing that the mortgaged property or a sufficient 
part thereof be sold and the proceeds of the sale (after deduction therefrom of the 
expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and applied in payment of what has been fo und 
or declared under or by the preliminary decree due to the plaintiff, together with such 
amount as may have been adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses 
and interest, and the balance, if any, be paid to the defendant or other pers ons entitled to 
receive the same.  
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from 
time to time at any time before a final decree for sale is passed, extend the time fixed for 
the payment of the amount found or declared due under sub -rule (1) or of the amount 
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest.  
(3) In a suit for foreclosure in the case of an anomalous mortgage, if the plaintiff 
succeeds the Court may at the instance of any party to  the suit or of any other person 
interested in the mortgage -security or the right of redemption pass a like decree (in liew 

of a decree for foreclosure) on such terms as it thinks fit, including the deposit in Court of 
a reasonable sum fixed by the Court t o meet the expenses of the sale and to secure the 
performance of the terms.  
(4)Where in a suit for sale or a suit for foreclosure in which sale is ordered, subsequent 
mortgages or persons deriving title from or subrogated to the rights of any such 
mortgage es are joined as parties the preliminary decree referred to in sub -rule (1) shall 
provide for the adjudication of the respective rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit 
in the manner and form set forth in Form No.9, form No.,10 or Form No.11 as t he case 
may be of Appendix D with such variations as the circumstances of the case may require.  
5. Where on or before the day fixed or at any time before the confirmation of a sale made 
in pursuance of a final decree passed under sub -rule (3) of this rule,  the defendant makes 
payment into Court of all amounts due from him under sub -sule (1) of rule 4, the Court 
shall on application made by the defendant in this behalf pass a final decree or if such 
decree has been passed an order - 
a) ordering the plaintiff  to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree,  
and if necessary, - 
b) ordering him to transfer the mortgaged property as directed in the said decree,  
and also if necessary, - 
c) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of the pro perty.  
(2) \where the mortgaged property or part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree 
passed under sub -rule (3) of this rule the Court shall not pass an order under sub -rule (1) 
of this rule unless the defendant in addition to the amount mentione d in sub -rule (1) 
deposits in Court for payment to the purchaser a sum equal to five per cent of the amount 
of the purchase money paid into Court by the purchaser.  
Where such deposit has been made the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for re -
payment of the amount of the purchase -money paid into Court by him, together with a 
sum equal to five percent thereof.  
(3) Where payment in accordance with sub -rule (1) has not been made, the Court shall on 
application made by the plaintiff in this behalf pass a f inal decree directing that the 
mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and that the proceeds of the sale 
be dealt with in the manner provided in sub -rule (1) of rule 4.  
6. Where the net proceeds of any sale held under the last preceding ru le are found 
insufficient to pay the amount due to the plaintiff the Court, on application by him may, if 
the balance is legally recoverable from the defendant otherwise than out of the property 
sold, pass a decree for such balance.  
7.- (1) In a suit for r edemption if the plaintiff succeeds the Court shall pass a preliminary 
decree - 

a) Ordering that an account be taken of what was due to the defendant at the date of such 
decree for - 
i) principal and interest on the mortgage,  
ii) the costs of suit if any aw arded to him and  
iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him up to that date in respect 
of his mortgage security together with interest thereon; or  
b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and  
c) directing - 
i) that, if the plaintif f pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before 
such date as the Court may fix within six months from the date on which the Court 
confirms and countersigns the account taken under clause (a) or from the date on which 
such amount is decla red in Court under clause (b) as the case may be and thereafter pays 
such amount as may be adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges and 
expenses as provided in rule 10 together with subsequent interest on such sums 
respectively as provided in r ule 11, the defendant shall deliver up the plaintiff or to such 
person as the plaintiff appoints all documents in his possession or power relating to the 
mortgaged property and shall if so required re -transfer the property to the plaintiff \at his 
cost fre e from the mortgage and from all encumbrances created by the defendant or any 
person claiming under him, or where the defendant claims by derived itle, by those under 
whom he claims, and shall also if necessary put the plaintiff in possession of the proper ty; 
and 
ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the preliminary 
decree is not made on or before the date so fixed or the plaintiff fails to pay within such 
time as the Court may fix the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequ ent costs charges 
expenses and interest the defendant shall be entitled to apply for a final decree - 
a) in the case of a mortgage other than a usufructuary mortgage a mortgage by 
conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage the terms of which provide for fore closure 
only and not for sale that the mortgaged property be sold or  
b) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or such an anomalous mortgage as 
aforesaid, that the plaintiff be debarred from all rights to redeem the property.  
(2) The Court may on go od cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court from 
time to time at any time before the passing of a final decree for foreclosure or sale as the 
case may be extend the time fixed for the payment of the amount found or declared due 
under sub -rule (1 ) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs charges, 
expenses and interest.  
8.- (1) Where before a final decree debarring the plaintiff from all right to redeem the 
mortgaged property has been passed or before the confirmation of a sale held in 
pursuance of a final decree passed under sub -rule (3) of this rule, the plaintiff makes 
payment into Court of all amounts due from him under sub -rule (1) of rule 7, the Court 

shall, on application made by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree or, if such 
decree has been passed, an order - 
a) ordering the defendant to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary 
decree,  
and if necessary, - 
b) ordering him to re -transfer at the cost of the plaintiff the mortgaged property as 
directed in the said decree,  
and also if necessary, - 
c) ordering him to put the plaintiff in possession of the property.  
(2) Where the mortgaged property or a part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree 
passed under sub -rule (3) of this rule, the Court  shall not pass an order under sub -rule (1) 
of this rule, unless the plaintiff in addition to the amount mentioned is sub -rule (1) 
deposits in Court for payment to the purchaser a sum equal to five per cent of the amount 
of the purchase money paid into Cou rt by the purchaser.  
Where such deposit has been made the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for re -
payment of the amount of the purchase money paid into Court by him, together with a 
sum equal to five per cent thereof.  
(3) Where payment in accordance  with sub -rule (1) has not been made the Court shall on 
application made by the defendant in this behalf, - 
a) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or of such an anomalous mortgage as is 
hereinbefore referred to in rule 7, pass a final decree decl aring that the plaintiff and all 
persons claiming under him are debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property 
and also if necessary ordering the plaintiff to put the defendant in possession of the 
mortgaged property; or  
b) in the case of any oth er mortgage, not being a usufructuary mortgage, pass a final 
decree that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the proceeds 
of the sale (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and 
applied in pay ment of what is found due to the defendant, and the balance, if any, be paid 
to the plaintiff or other persons entitled to receive the same]  
[8.-A- Where the net proceeds of any sale held under the last preceding rule are found 
insufficient to pay the amou nt due to the defendant, the Court on application by him may, 
if the balance is legally recoverable from the plaintiff otherwise than out of the property 
sold, pass a decree for such balance]  
9. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, if it appear s, upon taking the 
account referred to in rule 7, that nothing is due to the defendant or that he has been 
overpaid, the Court shall pass a decree directing the defendant, if so required, to re -
transfer the property and to pay to the plaintiff the amount w hich may be found due to 
him; and the plaintiff shall, if necessary, be put in possession of the mortgaged property.  

[10. In finally adjusting the amount to be paid to a mortgagee in case of a foreclosure, 
sale or redemption, the Court shall unless in the case of costs of the suit the conduct of 
the mortgagee has been such as to disentitle him thereto, add to the mortgage -money such 
costs of the suit and other costs charges and expenses as have been properly incurred by 
him since the date of the preliminary  decree for foreclosure sale or redemption up to the 
time of actual payment.  
11. In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure sale or redemption, where interest is 
legally recoverable, the Court may order payment of interest to the mortgagee as follows, 
namely: - 
a) interest up the date on or before which payment of the amount found or declared due is 
under the preliminary decree to be made by the mortgagor or other person redeeming the 
mortgage - 
i) on the principal amount found or declared due on the mor tgage, - at the rate payable on 
the principal, or where no such rage is fixed, at such rate as the Court deems reasonable,  
ii) on the amount of the costs of the suit awarded to the mortgagee, - at such rate as the 
Court deems reasonable from the date of th e preliminary decree, and  
iii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee for costs, charges and expenses 
properly incurred by the mortgagee in respect of the mortgage -security up to the date of 
the preliminary decree and added to the mortgage money, at t he rate agreed between the 
parties, or failing such rate, a the same rate as is payable on the principle, or failing both 
such rates at nine per cent per annum; and  
(b) subsequent interest up to the ate of realization or actual payment at such rate as the 
Court deems reasonable - 
i) on the aggregate of the principal sums specified in clause (a) and of the interest thereon 
as calculated in accordance with that clause; and  
ii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee in respect of such further costs charge s 
and expenses as may be payable under rule 10.]  
12. Where any property the sale of which is directed under this Order is subject to a prior 
mortgage, the Court may, with the consent of the prior mortgagee, direct that the property 
be sold free from the sa me giving to such prior mortgagee the same interest in the 
proceeds of the sale as he had in the property sold.  
14. - (1) Such proceeds shall be brought into Court and applied as follows: - 
first in payment of all expenses incident to the sale or properly i ncurred in any attempted 
sale; 
secondly, in payment of whatever is due to the prior mortgagee on account of the prior 
mortgage and of cost properly incurred in connection therewith.  

Thirdly in payment of all interest due on account of the mortgage in conse quence 
whereof the sale was directed and of the cost of the suit in which the decree directing the 
sale was made;  
Fourthly in payment of the principal money due on account of that mortgage; and  
Lastly the residue (if any) shall be paid to the person provin g himself to the interested in 
the property sold, of if there are more such persons than one, then to such persons 
according to their respective interests therein or upon their joint receipt.  
(2) Nothing in this rule or in rule 12 shall be deemed to affect  the powers conferred by 
section 57 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.  
14. (1) Where a mortgagee has obtained a decree for the payment of money in 
satisfaction of a claim arising under the mortgage, he shall not be entitled to bring the 
mortgaged prope rty to sale otherwise than by instituting a suit for sale in enforcement of 
the mortgage, and he may institute such suit notwithstanding anything contained in Order 
II, rule 2.  
(2) Nothing in sub -rule (1) shall apply to ny territories to which the Transfer  of Property 
Act, 1882 has not been extended.  
[15. All the provisions contained in this Order which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so 
far as may be apply to a mortgage by deposit of title -deeds within the meaning of section 
58, and to a charge within th e meaning of section 100 of the Transfer of Property Act 
1882]  
ORDER XXXV  
INTERPLEADER  
1. In every suit of interpleader the plaint shall, in addition to other statements necessary 
for plaints, state - 
a) that the plaintiff claims no interest in the subject  matter in dispute other than for 
charges or costs;  
b) the claims made by the defendants severally ; and  
c) that there is no collusion between the plaintiff and any of the defendants.  
2. Where the thing claimed is capable of being paid into Court or placed  in the custody of 
the Court the Plaintiff may be required to so pay or place it before he can be entitled to 
any order in the suit.  
3. Where any of the defendants in an interpleader -suit is actually suing the plaintiff in 
respect of the subject -matter of such suit, the Court in which the suit against the plaintiff 
is pending shall on being informed by the Court in which the interpleader suit has been 

instituted stay the proceedings as against him; and his costs in the suit so stayed may be 
provided for in such suit; but if and in so far as they are not provided for in that suit they 
may be added to his costs incurred in the interpleader suit.  
4. - (1) At the first hearing the Court may - 
a) declare that the plaintiff is discharged from all liability to the defendants in respect of 
the thing claimed, award him his costs and dismiss him from the suit; or  
b) if it thinks that justice or convenience so require retain all parties until the final 
disposal of the suit.  
(2) Where the Court finds that the admissions of the parties or other evidence enable it to 
do so, it may adjudicate the title to the thing claimed.  
(3) Where the admission of the parties do not enable the Court so to adjudicate it may 
direct - 
a) that an issue or issues between the parties be framed and tried and  
b) that any claimant be made a plaintiff in lieu of or in addition to the original plaintiff,  
and shall proceed to try the suit in the ordinary manner.  
5. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to enable agents to sue their principals, or 
tenants to sue then landlords for the purpose of compelling them to interplead with any 
persons other than persons making claim through such principals or the landlords.  
 
Illustrations  
a) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. C alleges that the jewe ls were 
wrongfully obtained from him by A and claims them from B. B cannot institute an 
interpleader -suit against A and C.  
b) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. He then writes to C for the purpose of 
making the jewels a security for a debt due  from himself to C. A afterwards alleges that 
C's debt is satisfied, and C alleges the contrary. Both claim the jewels from B. B may 
institute an interpleader -suit against A and C.  
6. Where the suit is properly instituted the Court may provide for the cost s of the original 
plaintiff by giving him a charge on the thing claimed or in some other effectual way.  
ORDER XXXVI  
SPECIAL CASE  
1.-(1) Parties claiming to be interested in the decision of any question of fact or law may 
enter into an agreement in writing stating such question in the form of a case for the 

opinion of the Court and providing that, upon the finding of the Court with respect to 
such question, - 
a) a sum of money fixed by the parties or to be determined by the Court shall be paid by 
one of the p arties to the other of them ; or  
b) some property, movable or immovable, specified in the agreement, shall be delivered 
by one of the parties to the other of them; or  
c) one or more of the parties shall do, or refrain from doing, some other particular act 
specified in the agreement.  
(2) Every case stated under this rule shall be divided into consecutively numbered 
paragraphs and shall concisely state such facts and specify such documents as may be 
necessary to enable the Court to decide the question raised thereby.  
2. Where the agreement is for the delivery of any property, or for the doing, or the 
refraining from doing, any particular act, the estimated value of the property to be 
delivered or to which the act specified has reference shall be stated in the agreement.  
3.-(1) The agreement if framed in accordance with the rules hereinbefore contained, may 
be filed in the Court which would have jurisdiction to entertain a suit, the amount or 
value of the subject -matter of which is the same as the amount or valu e of the subject -
matter of the agreement.  
(2) The agreement when so filed shall be numbered and registered as a suit between one 
or more of the parties claiming to be interested as plaintiff or plaintiffs, and the other or 
the others of them as defendant o r defendants; and notice shall be given to all the parties 
to the agreement other than the party or parties by whom it was presented.  
4. Where the agreement has been filed the parties to it shall be subject to the jurisdiction 
of the Court and shall be bou nd by the statements contained therein.  
5.-(1) The case shall be set down for hearing as a suit instituted in the ordinary manner, 
and the provisions of this Code shall apply to such suits so far as the same are applicable.  
(2) Where the Court is satisfied , after examination of the parties or after taking such 
evidence as it thinks fit, - 
a) that the agreement was duly executed by them, - 
b) that they have a bona fide interest in the question stated therein and  
c) that the same is fit to be decided,  
it shall proceed to pronounce judgement thereon in the same way as in an ordinary suit 
and upon the judgement so pronounced a decree shall follow.  
 
ORDER XXXVII  

SUMMARY PROCEDURE ON NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS  
 
1. This order shall apply only to the High Court [to the Di strict Court and to any other 
Civil Court notified in this behalf by the High Court.]  
2. - (1) All suits upon bills of exchange hundies or promissory notes, may, in case the 
plaintiff desires to proceed hereunder be instituted by presenting a plaint in the  form 
prescribed; but the summons shall be in Form No.4 in Appendix B or in such other form 
as may be from time to time prescribed.  
(2) In any case in which the plaint and summons are in such forms respectively the 
defendant shall not appear or defend the suit unless he obtains leave from a Judge as 
hereinafter provided so to appear and defend; and in default of his obtaining such leave or 
of his appearance and defence in pursuance thereof, the allegations in the plaint shall be 
deemed to be admitted and th e plaintiff shall be entitled to a decree - 
[a) for the principal sum due on the instrument and for interest calculated in accordance 
with the provisions of section 79 or section 80 as the case may be of the Negotiable 
Instruments Act 1881 up to the date o f the institution of the suit or for the sum mentioned 
in the summons whichever is less and for interest up to the date of the decree at the same 
rate or at such other rate as the Court thinks fit; and  
b) for such subsequent interest if any as the Court ma y order under section 34 of this 
Code; and  
d) for such sum for costs as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if the plaintiff claims more than such fixed sum for costs the costs shall be 
ascertained in the ordinary way.  
(3) A decree passed under this rule may be executed forthwith.  
3. - (1) The Court shall upon application by the defendant give leave to appear and to 
defend the suit, upon affidavits which disclose such facts as would make it incumbent on 
the holder to prove consideration, or such other facts as  the Court may deem sufficient to 
support the application.  
(2) Leave to defend may be given unconditionally or subject to such terms as to payment 
into Court giving security, framing and recording issues or otherwise as the Court thinks 
fit. 
[(3) The provi sions of section 5 of the Limitation Act 1908 (IX of 1908) shall apply to 
applications under sub -rule (1)].  
4. After decree the Court may under special circumstances, set aside the decree and if 
necessary stay or set aside execution, and may give leave to the defendant to appear to 

the summons and to defend the suit, if it seems reasonable to the Court so to do and on 
such terms as the Court thinks fit.  
5. In any proceedings under this Order the Court may order the bill hundi or note on 
which the suit is fo unded to be forthwith deposited with an officer of the Court and may 
further order that all proceedings shall be stayed until the plaintiff gives security for the 
costs thereof.  
6. The holder of every dishonoured bill of exchange or promissory note shall h ave the 
same remedies for the recovery of the expenses incurred in noting the same for non -
acceptance or non -payment or otherwise, by reason of such dishonour, as he has under 
this Order for the recovery of the amount of such bill or note.  
7. Save as provi ded by this Order the procedure in suits hereunder shall be the same as 
the procedure in suits instituted in the ordinary manner.  
 
ORDER XXXVIII  
ARREST AND ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT  
Arrest before Judgment  
 
1. Where at any stage of a suit other than a suit  of the nature referred to in section 16, 
clauses (a) to (d), the Court is satisfied by affidavit or otherwise, - 
a) that the defendant with intent to delay the plaintiff or to avoid any process of the Court 
or to obstruct or delay the execution of any dec ree that may be passed against him, - 
i) has absconded or left the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or  
ii) is about to abscond or leave the local limits of the the jurisdiction of the Court or  
iii) has disposed of or removed from the local lim its of the jurisdiction of the Court his 
property or any part thereof, or  
b) that the defendant is about to leave [Pakistan] under circumstances affording 
reasonable probability that the plaintiff will or may thereby be obstructed or delayed in 
the executi on of any decree that may be passed against the defendant in the suit,  
the Court may issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to 
show cause why he should not furnish security for his appearance:  
Provided that the defendant sha ll not be arrested if he pays to the officer entrusted with 
the execution of the warrant any sum specified in the warrant as sufficient to satisfy the 
plaintiff's claim; and such sum shall be held in deposit by the Court until the suit is 
disposed of or un til the further order of the Court.  

2.- (1) Where the defendant fails to show such cause the Court shall order him either to 
deposit in Court money or other property sufficient to answer the claim against him, or to 
furnish security for his appearance at a ny time when called upon while the suit is pending 
and until satisfaction of any decree that may be passed against him in the suit, or make 
such order as it thinks fit in regard to the sum which may have been paid by the defendant 
under the proviso to the last preceding rule.  
(2) Every surety for the appearance of a defendant shall bind himself in default of such 
appearance to pay any sum of money which the defendant may be ordered to pay in the 
suit. 
3.- (1) A surety for the appearance of a defendant may a t any time apply to the Court in 
which he became such surety to be discharged from his obligation.  
(2) On the application being made, the Court shall summon the defendant to appear or, if 
it thinks fit, may issue a warrant for his arrest in the first insta nce. 
(3) On the appearance of the defendant in pursuance of the summons or warrant, or on his 
voluntary surrender, the Court shall direct the surety to be discharged from his obligation, 
and shall call upon the defendant to find fresh security.  
4. Where th e defendant fails to comply with any order under rule 2 or rule 3, the Court 
may commit him to […..] prison until the decision of the suit or, where a decree is passed 
against the defendant, until the decree has been satisfied:  
Provided that no person shal l be detained in prison under this rule in any case for a longer 
period than six months, nor for a longer period than six weeks when the amount or value 
of the subject -matter of the suit does not exceed fifty rupees:  
Provided also that no person shall be d etained in prison under this rule after he has 
complied with such order.  
Attachment before Judgment  
5. - (1) Where at any stage of a suit, the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that 
the defendant with intent to obstruct or delay the execution of any decree that may be 
passed against him, - 
a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or  
b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court,  
the court may direct the  defendant, within a time to be fixed by it either to furnish 
security in such sum as may be specified in the order, to produce and place at the disposal 
of the Court, when required, the said property or the value of the same, or such portion 
thereof as ma y be sufficient to satisfy the decree, or to appear and show cause why he 
should not furnish security.  

(2) The plaintiff shall unless the Court otherwise directs, specify the property required to 
be attached and the estimated value thereof.  
(3) The Court m ay also in the order direct the conditional attachment of the whole or any 
portion of the property so specified.  
6. - (1) Where the defendant fails to show cause why he should not furnish security, or 
fails to furnish the security required, within the time  fixed by the Court the Court may 
order that the property specified, or such portion thereof as appears sufficient to satisfy 
any decree which may be passed in the suit, be attached.  
(2) Where the defendant shows such cause or furnishes the required securi ty, and the 
property specified or any portion of it has been attached, the Court shall order the 
attachment to be withdrawn, make such other order as it thinks fit.  
6. Save as otherwise expressly provided, the attachment shall be made in the manner 
provide d for the attachment of property in execution of a decree.  
7. Save as other wise expressly provided, the attachment shall be made in the manner 
provided for the attachment of property in execution of a decree.  
8. Where any claim is preferred to property a ttached before judgment such claim shall be 
investigated in the manner hereinbefore provided for the investigation of claims to 
property attached in execution of a decree for the payment of money.  
9. Where an order is made for attachment before judgment, t he Court shall order the 
attachment to be withdrawn when the defendant furnishes the security required, together 
with security for the costs of the attachment, or when the suit is dismissed.  
10. Attachment before judgment shall not affect the rights, exist ing prior to the 
attachment of persons not parties to the suit, nor bar any person holding a decree against 
the defendant from applying the for the sale of the property under attachment in 
execution of such decree.  
11. Where property is under attachment by  virtue of the provisions of this Order and a 
decree is subsequently passed in favour of the plaintiff, it shall not be necessary upon an 
application for execution of such decree to apply for a re -attachment of the property.  
12. Nothing in this Order shall  be deemed to authorise the plaintiff to apply for the 
attachment of any agricultural produce in the possession of an agriculturist, or to 
empower the Court to order the attachment or production of such produce.  
[13. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed t o empower any Court of Small Causes to 
make an order for the attachment of immovable property.]  
ORDER XXXIX  

TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS  
Temporary Injunctions  
1. Where in any suit it is proved by affidavit or otherwise - 
a) that any proper ty in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated 
by any party to the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or  
b) that the defendant threatens or intends to remove or dispose of his property with a view 
to defraud his  creditors,  
the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act, or make such 
other order for the purpose of staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, 
sale, removal or disposition of the property as the Court thinks fit , until the disposal of 
the suit or until further orders.  
2. (1) In any suit for restraining the defendant from committing a breach of contract or 
other injury of any kind whether compensation is claimed in the suit or not, the plaintiff 
may, at any time a fter the commencement of the suit, and either before or after judgment, 
apply to the Court for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from committing 
the breach of contract or injury complained of or any breach of contract or injury of a like 
kind arising out of the same contract or relating to the same property or right.  
(2) The Court may by order grant such injunction, on such terms as to the duration of the 
injunction keeping an account giving security or other wise, as the Court thinks fit.  
(3) In case of disobedience, or breach of any such terms, the Court granting an injunction 
may order the property of the person guilty of such disobedience of breach to be attached, 
and may also order such person to be detained in [……] prison for a term not exceeding 
six months, unless in the meantime the Court directs his release.  
(4) No attachment under this rule shall remain in force for more than one year, at the end 
of which time, if the disobedience or breach continues the property attached may be sold,  
and out of the proceeds the Court may award such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall 
pay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.  
[ (2-A) An interim injunction passed under rule 1 or 2 in the absence of defendant shall 
not ordinarily excee d fifteen days:  
Provided that such injunction may be extended for failure of its service on the defendant 
when such failure is not attributable to the plaintiff or when the defendant seeks time for 
defence of application for injunction.  
(2-B) The order of injunction made under rule 1 or 2 after hearing the parties or after 
notice to the defendant shall cease to have effect on the expiration of six months unless 
extended by the court after hearing the parties again and for reasons to be recorded for 

such ext ension:  
Provided that report of such extension shall be submitted to the High Court].  
[3. The Court shall in all cases, before granting an injunction direct notice of the 
application for the same to be given to the opposite -party:  
[Provided that except in the case of sale of goods for default in payment at the stipulated 
time of a debt in respect of which the goods were pledged with any bank, or where the 
injunction is to be granted against Government or a Government servant as such or any 
statutory authori ty, board or corporation set up or established by Government in any case 
not involving the ejectment of any person from or the demolition of, any premises, the 
Court may where it appears that the object of granting injunction would be defeted by the 
delay,  dispense with such notice:  
Provided further that the period of notice under this rule to Government or a Government 
servant as such or any statutory authority, board or corporation set up or established by 
Government shall not be less than two days nor ex ceed seven days.]  
4. Any order for an injunction may be discharged, or varied, or set aside by the Court on 
application made thereto by any party dissatisfied with such order.  
[ 4-A. An injunction granted by a Court in a suit which seeks to question the va lidity or 
legal effect of any order made, proceedings taken or act done by authority or person, 
which has been made, taken or done, or purports to have been made, taken or done under 
any law which is specified in Part I of the First Schedule to the Constit ution or relates to, 
or is connected with assessment or collection of public revenues shall cease to have effect 
on the expiration of a period of [ six months] following the day on which it is made, 
unless the case is finally decided, or the injunction is discharged or set aside, by the Court 
earlier.  
Explanation - In this rule, 'public revenues' includes the dues of any bank owned by the 
Federal Government or of any corporation or undertaking owned or controlled by the 
Federal Government or a Provincial Go vernment.]  
5. An injunction directed to a corporation is binding not only on the corporation itself, but 
also on all members and officers of the corporation whose personal action it seeks to 
restrain.  
6. The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit, order the sale by any person 
named in such order, and in such manner and on such terms as it thinks fit, of any 
movable property, being the subject -matter of suit or attached before judgment in such 
suit, which is subject to speedy and natural decay or which for any other just and 
sufficient cause it may be desirable to have sold at once.  
7. (1) The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit and on such terms as it 
thinks fit - 

a) make an order for the detention, preservation or inspection o f any property which is the 
subject matter of such suit or as to which any question may arise therein;  
b) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any person to enter upon or into any 
land or building in the possession of any other party to such suit; and  
c) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorise any samples to be taken or any 
observation to be made or experiment to be tried, which may seem necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or evidence.  
(2) The provis ions as to execution of process shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to persons 
authorised to enter under this rule.  
8. - (1) An application by the plaintiff for an order under rule 65 or rule 7 may be made 
after notice to the defendant at any time after institu tion of the suit.  
(2) An application by the defendant for a like order may be made after notice to the 
plaintiff at any time after appearance.  
9. Where land paying revenue to Government or a tenure liable to sale, is the subject -
matter of a suit, if the pa rty in possession of such land or tenure neglects to pay the 
government revenue, or the rent due to the proprietor of the tenure, as the case may be 
and such land or tenure is consequently ordered to be sold any other party to the suit 
claiming to have an interest in such land or tenure may upon payment of the revenue or 
rent due previously to the sale (and with or without security at the discretion of the Court) 
be put in immediate possession of the land or tenure;  
and the Court in its decree may award aga inst the defaulter the amount so paid, with 
interest thereon at such rate as the Court thinks fit, or may charge the amount so paid with 
interest thereon at such rate as the Court orders in any adjustment of accounts which may 
be directed in the decree pas sed in the suit.  
10. Where the subject matter of a suit is money or some other thing capable of delivery 
and any party thereto admits that he holds such money or other thing as a trustee for 
another party or that it belongs or is due to another party the C ourt may order the same to 
be deposited in |court or delivered to such last named party with or without security 
subject to the further direction of the Court.  
ORDER XL  
APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVERS  
1. - (1) Where it appears to the Court to be just and convenie nt, the Court may by order - 
a) appoint a receiver of any property, whether before or after decree;  
b) remove any person from the possession or custody of the property;  
c) commit the same to the possession, custody or management of the receiver; and  
d) con fer upon the receiver all such powers as to bringing and defending suits and for the 

realization, management, protection, preservation and improvement of the property the 
collection of the rents and profits thereof, the application and disposal of such ren ts and 
profits, and the execution of documents as the owner himself has or such of those powers 
as the Court thinks fit.  
(2) Nothing in this rule shall authorise the court to remove from the possession or custody 
of property any person whom any party to th e suit has not present right so to remove.  
2. The Court may by general or special order fix the amount to be paid as remuneration 
for the service of the receiver.  
3. Every receiver so appointed shall - 
a) furnish such security (if any as the Court thinks f it, duly to account for what he shall 
receive in respect of the property;  
b) submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the Court directs;  
c) pay the amount due from him as the Court directs; and  
d) be responsible for any loss occasioned to t he property by his wilful default or gross 
negligence.  
4. Where a receiver - 
a) fails to submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the Court directs, or  
b) fails to pay the amount due from him as the Court directs or  
c) occasions loss to the property by his wilful default or gross negligence,  
the Court may direct his property to be attached and may sell such property and may 
apply the proceeds to make good any amount found to be due from him or any loss 
occasioned by him, and shall pay the bal ance (if any) to the receiver.  
5. Where the property is land paying revenue to the Government or land of which the 
revenue has been assigned or redeemed and the Court considers that the interests of those 
concerned will be promoted by the management of the  Collector, the Court may, with the 
consent of the Collector appoint him to be receiver of such property.  
 
ORDER XLI  
APPEALS FROMORIGINAL DECREES  
1.- (1) Every appeal shall be preferred in the form of a memorandum signed by the 
appellant or his pleader and  presented to the Court or to such officer as it appoints in this 
behalf. The memorandum shall be accompanied by a copy of the decree appealed from 
and (unless the Appellate Court dispenses therewith) of the judgment on which it is 
founded.  

(2) The memoran dum shall set forth concisely and under distinct heads the grounds of 
objection to the decree appealed from without any argument or narrative; and such 
grounds shall be numbered consecutively.  
2. The appellant shall not except by leave of the Court, urge o r be heard in support of any 
ground of objection not set forth in the memorandum of appeal; but the Appellate Court 
in deciding the appeal, shall not be confined to the grounds of objection set forth in the 
memorandum of appeal or taken by leave of the Cou rt under this rule:  
Provided that the Court shall not rest its decision on any other ground unless the party 
who may be affected thereby has had sufficient opportunity of contesting the case on that 
ground.  
3. - (1) Where the memorandum of appeal is not dr awn up in the manner hereinbefore 
prescribed, it may be rejected, or be returned to the appellant for the purpose of being 
amended within a time to be fixed by the Court or be amended then and there.  
(2) Where the Court rejects any memorandum it shall reco rd the reasons for such 
rejection.  
(3) Where a memorandum of appeal is amended, the Judge, or such officer as he appoints 
in this behalf, shall sign or initial the amendment.  
4. Where there are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one in a suit, and the  decree 
appealed from proceeds on any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the 
defendants any one of the plaintiffs or of the defendants may appeal from the whole 
decree, and thereupon the Appellate Court may reverse or vary the decree in favour o f all 
the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case may be.  
STAY OF PRECEEDINGS AND OF EXECUTION  
5. - (1) An appeal shall not operate as a stay of proceedings under a decree or order, 
appealed from except so far as the Appellate Court may order, nor shall exec ution of a 
decree be stayed by reason only of an appeal having been preferred from the decree; but 
the Appellate Court may for sufficient cause order stay of execution of such decree.  
(2) Where an application is made for stay of execution of an appealable decree before the 
expiration of the time allowed for appealing therefrom the Court which passed the decree 
may on sufficient cause being shown order the execution to be stayed.  
(3) No order for stay of execution shall be made under sub -rule (1) or sub -rule(2) unless 
the Court making it is satisfied,  
a) that substantial loss may result to the party applying for stay of execution unless the 
order is made;  
b) that the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and  

c) that security has been given by the applicant for the due performance of such decree or 
order as may ultimately be binding upon him.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule(3), the Court may make an ex parte 
order for stay of execution pending the hearing of the application.  
6. - (1) Where an order is made for the execution of a decree from which an appeal is 
pending, the Court which passed the decree shall, on sufficient cause being shown by the 
appellant, require security to be taken for the restitution of any property which may be or 
has been taken in execution of the decree or for the payment of the value of such property 
and for the due performance of the decree or order of the Appellate Court, or the 
Appellate Court may for like cause direct the Court which passed the decr ee to take such 
security.  
(2) Where an order has been made for the sale of immovable property in execution of a 
decree, and an appeal is pending from such decree, the sale shall on the application of the 
judgment debtor to the Court which made the order, b e stayed on such terms as to giving 
security or otherwise as the Court thinks fit until the appeal is dispose of.  
7. [No security to be required from the Government or a public officer in certain cases.] 
Rep. By the A.O. 1937.  
8. The powers conferred by Ru les 5 and 6 shall be exercise -able where an appeal may be 
or has been preferred not from the decree but from an order made in execution of such 
decree:  
[Provided that, where such appeal has been preferred by judgment -debtor he shall be 
required, unless the  Court is of opinion that prima facie the appeal is one which must 
succeed owing to an error apparent on the face of the record. - 
a) in the case of a decree for the payment of money, to deposit the decretal amount or to 
furnish security for its payment; an d 
b) in the case of any other decree, to furnish security for the due performance of the 
decree]  
PROCEDURE ON ADMISSION OF APPEAL  
9. - (1) Where a memorandum of appeal is admitted, the Appellate Court or the proper 
officer of that Court shall endorse there on the date of presentation, and shall register the 
appeal in a book o be kept for the purpose.  
(2) Such book shall be called the Register of Appeals.  
10.- (1) The Appellate court may, in its discretion, either before the respondent is called 
upon to appea r and answer or afterwards on the application of the respondent, demand 
from the appellant security for the costs of the appeal, or of the original suit, or of both:  

Provided that the Court shall demand such security in all cases in which the appellant is 
residing out of [Pakistan] and is not possessed of any sufficient immovable property 
within [Pakistan] other than the property (if any) to which the appeal relates.  
(2) Where such security is not furnished within such time as the Court orders the Court 
shall reject the appeal.  
11. - (1) The Appellate Court, after sending for the record if it thinks fit so to do, and 
after fixing a day for hearing the appellant or his pleader and hearing him accordingly if 
he appears on that day may dismiss the appeal witho ut sending notice to the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred and without serving notice on the respondent or his 
pleader.  
(2) If on the day fixed or any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned the 
appellant does not appear when the appe al is called on for hearing, the Court may make 
an order that the appeal be dismissed.  
(3) The dismissal of an appeal under this rule shall be notified to the Court from whose 
decree the appeal is preferred.  
12. - (1) Unless the Appellate Court dismisses t he appeal under rule 11, it shall fix a day 
for hearing the appeal.  
(2) Such day shall be fixed with reference to the current business of the Court, the place 
of residence of the respondent and the time necessary for the service of the notice of 
appeal so as to allow the respondent sufficient time to appear and answer the appeal on 
such day.  
13. - (1) Where the appeal is not dismissed under rule 11, the Appellate Court shall send 
notice of the appeal to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred.  
(2) Where the appeal is from the decree of a Court, the records of which are not deposited 
in the Appellate Court, the Court receiving such notice shall send with all practicable 
dispatch all material papers in the suit or such papers as may be specially ca lled for by 
the Appellate Court.  
(3) Either party may apply in writing to the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred specifying any of the papers in such Court of which he requires copies to be 
made; and copies of such papers shall be made at the expense of and given to the 
applicant.  
14. - (1) Notice of the day fixed under rule 12 shall be affixed in the Appellate Court -
house and a like notice shall be sent by the Appellate Court to the Court from whose 
decree the appeal is preferred and shall be served on the respondent or on his pleader in 
the Appellate court in the manner provided for the service on a defendant of a summons 

to appear and answer; and all the provisions applicable to such summons and to 
proceedings with reference to the service th ereof shall apply to the service of such notice.  
(2) Instead of sending the notice to the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, 
the Appellate court may itself cause the notice to be served on the respondent or his 
pleader under the provisions ab ove referred to.  
15. The notice to the respondent shall declare that if he does not appear in the Appellate 
Court on the day so fixed the appeal will be heard ex parte.  
 
PROCEDURE ON HEARING  
 
16.- (1) On the day fixed or on any other day to which the heari ng may be adjourned, the 
appellant shall be heard in support of the appeal.  
(2) The Court shall then if it does not dismiss the appeal at once, hear the respondent 
against the appeal and in such case the appellant shall be entitled to reply.  
17. - (1) Wher e on the day fixed, or on any other day to which the hearing may be 
adjourned, the appellant does not appear when the appeal is called on for hearing the 
Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed.  
(2) Where the appellant appears and the responde nt does not appear, the appeal shall be 
heard ex parte.  
18. Where on the day fixed or on any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned it 
is found that the notice to the respondent has not been served in consequence of the 
failure of the appellant to  deposit within the period fixed the sum required to defray the 
cost of serving the notice the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed  
 
Provided that no such order shall be made although the notice has not been served upon 
the respondent, if o n any such day the respondent appears when the appeal is called on 
for hearing.  
19. - (1) Where an appeal is dismissed under rule 11, sub -rule (2) of rule 17 or rule 18 the 
appellant may apply to the Appellate Court for the re -admission of the appeal; and where 
it is proved that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the 
appeal was called on for hearing or from depositing the sum so required, the Court shall 
re-admit the appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
[(2) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act 1908 (IX of 1908) shall apply to an 
application for re -admission of an appeal dismissed under sub -rule (2) of rule 11 or sub -
rule (1) of rule 17.]  

20. Where it appears to the Court at the hearing that a ny person who was a party to the 
suit in the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, but who has not been made a 
party to the appeal is interested in the result of the appeal the Court may adjourn the 
hearing to a future day to be fixed by the Cou rt and direct that such person be made a 
respondent.  
21. - (1) Where an appeal is heard ex parte and judgment is pronounced against the 
respondent, he may apply to the Appellate court ro re -hear the appeal; and if he satisfies 
the Court that the notice was  not duly served or that he was prevented by sufficient cause 
from appearing when the appeal was called on for hearing, the Court shall re -hear the 
appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit to impose upon him.  
[(2) The provisions of se ction 5 of the Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908) shall apply to 
applications under sub -rule (1).]  
22. - (1) Any respondent though he may not have appealed from any part of the decree, 
may not only support the decree on any of the grounds decided against hi m in the Court 
below but take any cross -objection to the decree which he could have taken by way of 
appeal provided he has filed such objection in the Appellate Court within one month from 
the date of service on him or his pleader of notice of the day fixe d for hearing the appeal, 
or within such further time as the Appellate Court may see fit to allow.  
(2) Such cross -objection shall be in the form of a memorandum and the provisions of rule 
1, so far as they relate to the form and contents of the memorandum of appeal shall apply 
thereto.  
(3) Unless the respondent files with the objection a written acknowledgment from the 
party who may be affected by such objection or his pleader of having received a copy 
thereof, the Appellate Court shall cause a copy to be s erved, as soon as may be after the 
filing of the objection, on such party or his pleader at the expense of the respondent.  
(4) Where in any case in which any respondent has under this rule filed a memorandum 
of objection , the original appeal is withdrawn or is dismissed for default, the objection so 
filed may nevertheless be heard and determined after such notice to the other parties as 
the Court thinks fit.  
(5) The provisions relating to pauper appeals shall, so far as they can be made applicable 
apply to  an objection under this rule.  
23. Where the Court from whose decree an appeal is preferred has disposed of the suit 
upon a preliminary point and the decree is reversed in appeal, the Appellate Court may, if 
it thinks fit, by order remand the case, and may  further direct what issue or issues shall be 
tried in the case so remanded and shall send a copy of its judgment and order to the Court 
from whose decree the appeal is preferred, with directions to re -admit the suit under its 
original number in the regist er of civil suits, and proceed to determine the suit; and the 
evidence (if any) recorded during the original trial shall subject to all just exceptions be 
evidence during the trial after remand.  

 
24. Where the evidence upon the record is sufficient to enab le the Appellate Court to 
pronounce judgment the Appellate Court may after resettling the issues if necessary 
finally determine the suit, notwithstanding that the judgment of the court from whose 
decree the appeal is preferred has proceeded wholly upon som e ground other than that on 
which the Appellate Court proceeds.  
25. Where the court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has omitted to frame or try 
any issue, or to determine any question of fact which appears to the Appellate Court 
essential to the right decision of the suit upon the merits the Appellate Court may if 
necessary, frame issues, and refer the same for trial to the Court from whose decree the 
appeal is preferred and in such case shall direct such Court to take the additional evidence 
required. 
And such court shall proceed to try such issues, and shall return the evidence to the 
appellate Court together with its findings thereon and the reasons therefore.  
26. - (1) Such evidence and findings shall from part of the record in the suit; and ei ther 
party may, within a time to be fixed by the Appellate Court, present a memorandum of 
objections to any findings.  
(2) After the expiration of the period so fixed for presenting such memorandum the 
Appellate Court shall proceed to determine the appeal.  
27. - (1) The parties to an appeal shall not be entitled to produce additional evidence, 
whether oral or documentary in the appellate Court, But if - 
a) the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to admit evidence 
which ought to have b een admitted or,  
a) The Appellate Court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be 
examined to enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause,  
The Appellate Court may allow such evidence or document to be produced or wit ness to 
be examined.  
(2) Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an Appellate Court the 
Court shall record the reason for its admission.  
28. Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced the Appellate Court may 
either take such e vidence or direct the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, 
or any other subordinate Court, to take such evidence and to send it when taken to the 
Appellate Court.  
29. Where additional evidence is directed or allowed to be taken the Appellate Co urt 
shall specify the points to which the evidence is to be confined and record on its 
proceedings the points so specified.  

JUDGMENT IN APPEAL  
30. The Appellate Court after hearing the parties or their pleaders and referring to any 
part of the proceedings whether on appeal or in the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred to which reference maybe considered necessary, shall pronounce judgment in 
open Court, either at once or on some future day of which notice shall be given to the 
parties or their p leaders.  
31. The judgment of the Appellate Court shall be in writing and shall state - 
a. the points for determination;  
b. the decision thereon;  
c. the reasons for the decision; and  
d. where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief to whi ch the appellant 
is entitled;  
and shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed and dated by the Judge or by the 
Judges concurring therein.  
32. The judgment may be for confirming, varying or reversing the decree from which the 
appeal is preferred, or, if the parties to the appeal agree as to the form which the decree in 
appeal shall take, or as to the order to be made in appeal the Appellate Court may pass a 
decree or make an order accordingly.  
33. The Appellate Court shall have power to pass any decree  and make any order which 
ought to have been passed or made and to pass or make such further or other decree or 
order as the case may require, and this power may be exercised by the Court 
notwithstanding that the appeal is as to part only of the decree and  may be exercised in 
favour of all or any of the respondents or parties although such respondents or parties 
may not have filed any appeal or objection:  
[Provided that the Appellate Court shall not make any order under section 35 -A in 
pursuance of any obje ction on which the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred 
has omitted or refused to make such order.]  
Illustration  
A claims a sum of money as due to him form X or Y, and in a suit against both obtains a 
decree against X, X appeals and A and Y are  respondents. The Appellate Court decides in 
favour of X. It has power to pass a decree against Y.  
34. Where the appeal is heard by more Judges that one, any Judge dissenting from the 
judgment of the Court shall state in writing the decision or order which  he thinks should 
be passed on the appeal and he may state his reasons for the same.  
DECREE IN APPEAL  

35. - (1) The decree of the Appellate Court shall bear date the day on which the judgment 
was pronounced.  
(2) The decree shall contain the number of the a ppeal the names and descriptions of the 
appellant and respondent and a clear specification of the relief granted or other 
adjudication made.  
(3) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the appeal and by whom or 
out of what property, and  in what proportions such costs and the costs in the suit are to be 
paid.  
(4) The decree shall be signed and dated by the Judge or Judges who passed it:  
Provided that where there are more Judges than one and there is a difference of opinion 
among them, it shall not be necessary for any Judge dissenting from the judgment of the 
Court to sign the decree.  
36. Certified copies of the judgment and decree in appeal shall be furnished to the parties 
on application to the Appellate Court and at their expense.  
37. A  copy of the judgment and of the decree, certified by the Appellate Court or such 
officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall be sent to the Court which passed the decree 
appealed from and shall be filed with the original proceedings in the suit and an en try of 
the judgment of the Appellate Court shall be made in the register of civil suits.  
ORDER XLII  
AAPPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES  
1. The rules of Order XLI shall apply so far as may be to appeals from Appellate decrees.  
 
ORDER XLIII  
APPEALS FROM ORDERS  
1. An appeal shall lie from the following orders under the provisions of section 104, 
namely: - 
a) an order under rule 10 of Order VII returning a plaint to be presented to the proper 
Court;  
b) an order under rule 10 of Order VIII pronouncing judgment agains t a party;  
c) an order under rule 9 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for 
an order to set aside the dismissal of a suit;  
d) an order under the rule 13 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to 
appeal) for an orde r to set aside a decree passed ex parte;  

e) an order under rule 4 of Order X pronouncing judgment against a party;  
f) an order under rule 21 of Order XI  
g) an order under rule 10 of Order XVI pronouncing judgment against a party;  
h) an order under rule 20 of Order XVI pronouncing judgment against a party;  
i) an order under rule 34 of Order XXI on an objection to the draft of a document or of an 
endorsement;  
[ii) an order under rule 62 or rule 103 of Order XXI relating to the right title or interest of 
the c laimant or objector in attached property;]  
j) an order under rule 72 or rule 92 of Order XXI setting aside or refusing to set aside a 
sale; 
k) an order under rule 9 of Order XXII refusing to set aside the abatement or dismissal of 
a suit;  
l) an order under  rule 10 of Order XXII giving or refusing to give leave;  
m) an order under rule 3 of Order XXIII recording or refusing to record an agreement 
compromise or satisfaction;  
n) an order under rule 2 of Order XXV rejecting an application (in a case open to appe al) 
for an order to set aside the dismissal of a suit;  
o) an order [under rule 2 rule 4 or rule 7] of Order XXIV refusing to extend the time for 
the payment of mortgage money;  
p) an order in interpleader suits under rule 3, rule 4 or rule 6 of Order XXXV;  
q) an order under rule 2, rule 3 or rule 6 of Order XXXVIII;  
r) an order under rule 1, rule 2 rule 4 or rule 10 of Order XXXIX;  
s) an order under rule 1 or rule 4 of Order XL;  
t) an order of refusal under rule 19 of Order XLI to readmit or under rule 21 of  Order XLI 
to re -hear an appeal;  
u) an order under rule 23 of Order XLI remanding a case where an appeal would lie from 
the decree of the Appellate Court;  
v) an order made by any Court other than a High Court refusing the grant of a certificate 
under rule 6 of Order XLV;  
w) an order under rule 4 of Order XL:VII granting an application for review.  
1. The rules of Order XLI shall apply so far as may be to appeals from orders.  
 
[3. - (1) Where an appeal against an order is preferred during the pendency of a su it the 
appellant shall before presenting the appeal give notice of such appeal to the respondent 
or his advocate by delivering a copy of the memorandum and grounds of appeal 
alongwith a copy of the order appealed against [either personally or through regis tered 
post acknowledgement due and the postal or other receipt shall be filed with the 
memorandum of appeal for the record of the appellate Court].  
(2) On receipt of notice referred to in sub -rule (1) the respondent may with the 
permission of the Court app ear before it and contest the appeal and may be awarded costs 
on dismissal of the appeal in limine.  

4. The provisions of rule 3 shall mutatis mutandis, apply to all applications filed before 
an appellate Court during the pendency of a suit.]  
 
ORDER XLIV  
PAUPER APPEALS  
1. Any person entitled to prefer an appeal who is unable to pay the fee required for the 
memorandum of appeal may present an application accompanied by a memorandum of 
appeal and may be allowed to appeal as a pauper subject in all matters incl uding the 
presentation of such application to the provisions relating to suits by paupers in so far as 
those provisions are applicable:  
Provided that the Court shall reject the application unless upon a perusal thereof and of 
the judgment and decree appeal ed from it sees reason to think that the decree is contrary 
to law or to some usage having the force of law or is otherwise erroneous or unjust .  
2. The inquiry into the pauperism of the applicant may be made either by the Appellate 
Court or under the orde rs of the Appellate Court by the Court from whose decision the 
appeal is preferred:  
Provided that if the applicant was allowed to sue or appeal as a pauper in the Court fro 
whose decree the appeal is preferred no further inquiry in respect of his pauperism  shall 
be necessary unless the Appellate Court sees cause to direct such inquiry.  
ORDER XLV  
APPEALS TO THE [SUPREME COURT]  
 
[1. In this Order unless there is something repugnant in subject or context the expression 
"decree" shall include a judgment or a fi nal Order.]  
2. Whoever desires to appeal to [the Supreme Court] shall apply by petition to the Court 
whose decree is complained of.  
[3. - (1) A petition made under rule 2 shall briefly state the grounds of appeal and pray 
for a certificate.]  
(2) Upon recei pt of such petition the Court shall direct notice to be served on the 
opposite -party to show cause why the said certificate should not be granted:  
[Provided that no notice shall be directed to be served on or given to the opposite party or 
to the legal rep resentative of a deceased opposite party in a case where such opposite 

party did not appear either at the hearing in the Court whose decree is complained of or at 
any proceedings subsequent to the decree of that Court.]  
[(3) The Court may if the opposite p arty in response to the notice issued under sub -rule 
(2) appears after hearing both the parties or if the opposite party does not appear in 
response to such notice then after hearing the party making the petition, grant or refuse 
the certificate]  
(4) If on  the date fixed for the hearing the party making the petition does not appear and 
the opposite party appears in response to such notice or if both the parties do not appear 
on such date the petition shall be dismissed.]  
4. for the purposes of pecuniary val uation suits involving substantially the same questions 
for determination and decided by the same judgment may be consolidated; but suits 
decided by separate judgments shall not be consolidated notwithstanding that they 
involve substantially the same quest ions for determination.  
5. In the event of any dispute arising between the parties as to the amount or value of the 
subject matter of the suit in the Court of first instance or as to the amount or value of the 
subject matter in dispute on appeal to [the Su preme Court], the Court to which a petition 
for a certificate is made under rule 2 may, if it thinks fit refer such dispute for report to 
the Court of first instance which last mentioned Court shall proceed to determine such 
amount or value and shall retur n its report together with the evidence to the Court by 
which the reference was made.  
6. [Omitted by Federal Adaptation of Laws Order (P.O. 4 of 1975) w.e.f. 1st August 
1975]  
7. - (1) Where the certificate is granted the applicant shall within [ninety days  or such 
further period, not exceeding sixty days as the Court may upon cause shown allow] from 
the date of the decree complained of or within six weeks from the date of the grant of the 
certificate whichever is the later date, - 
a) furnish security [in ca sh or in Government securities] for the costs of the respondent 
and 
b) deposit the amount required to defray the expense of translating, transcribing, indexing 
[printing] and transmitting to [the Supreme Court] a correct copy of the whole record of 
the sui t, except - 
(1) formal documents directed to be excluded by any [Rule of the Supreme Court] in 
force for the time being  
(2) papers which the parties agree to exclude;  
(3) accounts or portions of accounts which the officer empowered by the Court for that 
purpose considers unnecessary and which the parties have not specifically asked to be 
included; and  
(4) such other documents as the High Court may direct to be excluded;  

[Provided that the Court at the time of granting the certificate may after hearing any 
opposite party who appears order on the ground of special hardship that some other form 
of security may be furnished;  
Provided further that no adjournment shall be granted to an opposite party to contest the 
nature of such security.  
8. Where such security h as been furnished and deposit made to the satisfaction of the 
Court the Court shall - 
a) declare the appeal admitted  
b) give notice thereof to the respondent  
c) transmit to [the Supreme Court] under the seal of the Court a correct copy of the said 
record e xcept as aforesaid and  
d) give to either party one or more authenticated copies of any of the papers in the suit on 
his applying therefore any paying the reasonable expenses incurred in preparing them.  
9. At any time before the admission of the appeal the Court may upon cause shown 
revoke the acceptancy of any such security and make further directions thereon.  
9.-A. [Omitted by Federal Adaptation of Laws Order (P.O. 4 of 1975) with effect from 
1st August 1975.]  
10. Where at any time after the admission of a n appeal but before the transmission of the 
copy of the record except as aforesaid to [the Supreme Court] wuch security appears 
inadequate.  
Or further payment is required for the purpose of translating, transcribing, printing, 
indexing or transmitting the copy of the record except as aforesaid,  
The Court may order the appellant to furnish within a time to be fixed by the Court other 
and sufficient security or to make within like time the required payment.  
11. Where the appellant fails to comply with such or der, the proceedings shall be stayed.  
And the appeal shall not proceed without an order in this behalf of [Supreme Court],  
And in the meantime execution of the decree appealed from shall not be stayed.  
12. When the copy of the record except as aforesaid, h as been transmitted to [the supreme 
Court] the appellant may obtain a refund of the balance (if any) of the amount which he 
has deposited under rule 7.  
13. - (1) Notwithstanding the grant of a certificate for the admission of any appeal, the 
decree appeale d from shall be unconditionally executed, unless the Court otherwise 
directs.  

(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, on special cause shown by any party interested in the 
suit, or otherwise appearing to the Court, - 
a) impound any movable property in dispute  or any part thereof, or  
b) allow the decree appealed from to be executed, taking such security from the 
respondent as the Court thinks fit for the due performance of any order which [the 
Supreme Court] may make on the appeal, or  
c) stay the execution of t he decree appealed from taking such security from the appellant 
as the Court thinks fit for the due performance of the decree appealed from or of any 
order which [the Supreme Court] may make on the appeal, or  
d) place any party seeking the assistance of th e Court under such conditions or give such 
other direction respecting the subject -matter of the appeal, as  
it thinks fit, by the appointment of a receiver or otherwise.  
14. - Where at any time during the pendency of the appeal the security furnished by ei ther 
party appears inadequate, the Court may, on the application of the other party, require 
further security.  
(2) in default of such further security being furnished as required by the Court, - 
(a) if the original security was furnished by the appellant, the Court may, on the 
application of the respondent, execute the decree appealed from as if the appellant had 
furnished no such security;  
(b) if the original security was furnished by the respondent, the Court shall, so far as may 
be practicable, stay the further execution of the decree, and restore the parties to the 
position in which they respectively were when the security which appears inadequate was 
furnished, or give such direction respecting the subject -matter of the appeal as it thinks 
fit. 
15. - (1) Whoever desires to obtain execution of any order of [the Supreme Court] shall 
apply by petition, accompanied by a certified copy of the decree passed or order made in 
appeal and sought to be executed, to the Court from which the appeal to [the Supreme 
Court] was preferred.  
(2) Such Court shall transmit the order of [the Supreme Court] to the Court which passed 
the first decree appealed from, or to such other Court as [the Supreme Court] by such 
order may direct, and shall (upon the application of either p arty) give such directions as 
may be required for the execution of the same; and the Court to which the said order is so 
transmitted shall execute it accordingly, in the manner and according to the provisions 
applicable to the execution of its original dec rees. 
[(3) * * * * * * * * *]  
[(4) Unless [the Supreme Court] is pleased otherwise to direct, no order of [the Supreme 
Court] shall be inoperative on the ground that no notice has been served on or given to 
the legal representative of any deceased opposite -party or deceased respondent in a case 

where such opposite -party or respondent did not appear either at the hearing in the Court 
whose decree was complained of or at any proceedings subsequent to the decree of that 
Court but such order shall have the same  force and effect as if it had been made before 
the death took place.]  
16. The orders made by the Court which executes the order of [the Supreme Court], 
relating to such execution, shall be appeal able in the same manner and subject to the 
same rules as th e orders of such Court relating to the execution of its own decrees.  
17. [Appeals to the Federal Court]. Omitted by the Federal Court Act 1941 (XXI of 
1941), S.2.  
 
ORDER XLVI  
REFERENCE  
 
1. Where before or on the hearing of a suit or an appeal in which the decree is not subject 
to appeal, or where, in the execution of any such decree, any question of law or usage 
having the force of law arises on which the Court trying the suit or appeal, or executing 
the decree, entertains reasonable doubt, the Court may, e ither of its own motion or on the 
application of any of the parties, draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the point 
on which doubt is entertained and refer such statement with its own opinion on the point 
for the decision of the High Court.  
 
2. The Court may either stay the proceedings or proceed in the case notwithstanding such 
reference, and may pass a decree or make an order contingent upon the decision of the 
High Court on the point referred;  
But no decree or order shall be executed in any c ase in which such reference is made 
until the receipt of a copy of the judgment of the High Court upon the reference.  
3. The High Court, after hearing the parties if they appear and desire to be heard, shall 
decide the point so referred, and shall transmit  a copy of its judgment, under the signature 
of the Registrar, to the Court by which the reference was made; and such Court shall, on 
the receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with the decision of the 
High Court.  
4. The costs (if an y) consequent on a reference for the decision of the High Court shall be 
costs in the case.  
5. Where a case is referred to the High Court under rule 1, the High Court may return the 
case for amendment, and may alter, cancel or set aside any decree or order  which the 

Court making the reference has passed or made in the case out of which the reference 
arose, and make such order as it thinks fit.  
6.-(1) Where at any time before judgment a Court in which a suit has been instituted 
doubts whether the suit is cog nizable by a Court of Small Causes or is not so cognizable, 
it may submit the record to the High Court, with a statement of its reasons for the doubt 
as to the nature of the suit.  
(2) On receiving the record and statement, the High Court may order the Cour t either to 
proceed with the suit or to return the plaint for presentation to such other Court as it may 
in its order declare to be competent to take cognizance of the suit.  
7.-(1) Where it appears to a District Court that a Court subordinate thereto has, by reason 
of erroneously holding a suit to be cognizable by a Court of Small Causes or not to be so 
cognizable, failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law, or if required by a party 
shall submit the record to the High Court with a statement of i ts reasons for considering 
the opinion of the subordinate Court with respect to the nature of the suit to be erroneous.  
(2) On receiving the record and statement the High Court may make such order in the 
case as it thinks fit.  
(3) With respect to any proce edings subsequent to decree in any case submitted to the 
High Court under this rule, the High Court may make such order as in the circumstance 
appears to it to be just and proper.  
(4) A Court subordinate to a District Court shall comply with any requisitio n which the 
District Court may make for any record or information for the purpose of this rule.  
 
ORDER XLVII  
REVIEW  
 
1.- (1) Any person considering himself aggrieved - 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has 
been preferred.  
(b) By a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or  
(c) By a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes,  
And who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the 
exercise of due diligence, was o t within his knowledge or could not be produced by him 
at the time when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or 
error apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to 

obtain a review of the de cree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review 
of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order.  
(2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order may apply for a review of 
judgment notwithstanding the pendency of an appeal by some other party except where 
the ground of such appeal is common to the applicant and the appellant, or when, being 
respondent, he can present to the Appellate Court the case on which he applies for the 
review.  
2. An application for review of a decree or order of a Court, not being a High Court, upon 
some ground other than the discovery of such new and important matter or evidence as is 
referred to in rule 1 or the existence of a clerical or arithmetical mistake or error apparent 
on the face of t he decree, shall be made only to the Judge who passed the decree or made 
the order sought to be reviewed; but any such application may, if the Judge who passed 
the decree or made the order has ordered notice to issue under rule 4, sub -rule (2), 
proviso, (a ) be disposed of by his successor.  
1. The provisions as to the form of preferring appeal shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to 
applications for review.  
4.-(1) Where it appears to the Court that there is not sufficient ground for a review, it 
shall reject the a pplication.  
(2) Where the Court is of opinion that the application for review should be granted it shall 
grant the same;  
Provided that - 
(a) no such application shall be granted without previous notice to the opposite -party to 
enable him to appear and be h eard in support of the decree or order, a review of which is 
applied for; and  
(b) no such application shall be granted on the ground of discovery of new matter or 
evidence which, the applicant alleges was not within his knowledge or could not be 
adduced by  him when the decree or order was passed or made, without strict proof of 
such allegation.  
5. Where the Judge or Judges, or any one of the Judges, who passed the decree or made 
the order, a review of which is applied for, continues or continue attached to the Court at 
the time when the application for a review is presented and is not or are not precluded by 
absence or other cause for a period of six months next after the application from 
considering the decree or order to which the application from consider ing the decree or 
order to which the application refers, such Judge or Judges or any of them shall hear the 
application and no other judge or judges of the Court shall hear the same.  
6.- (1) Where the application for a review is heard by more than one Judg e and the Court 
is equally divided, the application shall be rejected.  

(2) Where there is a majority the decision shall be according to the opinion of the 
majority.  
7.-(1) An order of the Court rejecting the application shall not be appealable; but an orde r 
granting an application may be objected to on the ground that the application was - 
(a) in contravention of the provisions of rule 2,  
(b) in contravention of the provisions of rule 4, or  
(c) after the expiration of the period of limitation prescribed the refore and without 
sufficient cause.  
 
Such objection may be taken at once by an appeal from the order granting the application 
or in any appeal from the final decree or order passed or made in the suit.  
(2) Where the application has been rejected in conseq uence of the failure of the applicant 
to appear, he may apply for an order to have the rejected application restored to the file, 
and where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented by any 
sufficient cause from appearing when such  application was called on for hearing the 
Court shall order it to be restored to the file upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it 
thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for hearing the same.  
(3) No order shall be made under sub rule (2) unless notice of the application has been 
served on the opposite -party.  
8. When an application for review is granted, a note thereof shall be made in the register 
and the Court may at once re -hear the case or make, such order in regard to the re -hearing 
as it thinks fit . 
[9. - (1) No application to review an order made on an application for a review or a 
decree or order passed or made on a review shall be entertained.  
(2) Nothing in this order shall apply to any judgment pronounced or order made by the 
Supreme Court.]  
 
ORDER XLVIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
1. - (1) Every process issued under this Code shall be served at the expense of the party 
on whose behalf it is issued, unless the Court otherwise directs.  
(2) The court -fee chargeable for such service shall be paid within a time  to be fixed 
before the process is issued.  

2. All orders, notices and other documents required by this Code to be given to or served 
on any person shall be served in the manner provided for the service of summons.  
3. The forms given in the appendices, with  such variation as the circumstances of each 
case may require shall be used for the purposes therein mentioned.  
 
ORDER XLIX  
HIGH COURTS  
 
1. Notice to produce documents, summonses to witnesses, and every other judicial 
process, issued in the exercise of the  original civil jurisdiction of the High Court, and of 
its matrimonial, testamentary and intestate jurisdictions, except summonses to 
defendants, writs of execution and notices to respondents may be served by the attorneys 
in the suits, or by persons emplo yed by them, or by such other persons as the High Court, 
by any rule or order, directs.  
2. Nothing in this Schedule shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any rules in force 
at the commencement of this Code for the taking of evidence or the recording  of 
judgment and orders by a High Court.  
3. The following rules shall not apply to any High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or 
extraordinary original civil jurisdiction, namely: - 
1) rule 10 and rule 11, clauses (b) and (c), of Order VII,  
2) rule 3 of  Order X;  
3) rule 2 of Order XVI;  
4) rules 5,6,8,9,10,11,13,14,15 and 16 (so far as relates to the manner of taking evidence) 
of Order XVIII;  
5) rules 1 to 8 of Order XX; and  
6) rule 7 of Order XXXIII (so far as relaxes to the making of a memorandum);  
and rule 35 of Order XLI shall not apply to any High Court in the exercise of its appellate 
jurisdiction.  
ORDER L  
PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS  
 
1. The provisions hereinafter specified shall not extend to Courts constituted under the 
Provincial Small Cause Cou rts Act, 1887, *** or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a 
Court of Small Causes [under the said Act], that is to say - 

a) so much of this schedule as relates to - 
i) suit excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes or the execution of 
decrees in such suits;  
ii) the execution of decrees against immovable property or the interest of a partner in 
partnership property;  
ii) the settlement of issues; and  
b) the following rules and Orders, - 
Order II, rule 1 (frame of suit);  
Order X, rule 3 (rec ord of examination of parties);  
Order XV, except so much of rule 4 as provides for the pronouncement at once of 
judgment ;  
Order XVIII, rules 5 to 12 (evidence);  
Order XLI to XLV (appeals);  
Order XLVII, rules 2,3,5,6,7 (review);  
Order LI.  
 
ORDER LI  
[PRESID ENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS]  
Omitted by the A.O., 1949.  
 
ORDER L  
PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS  
1. Provincial Small Cause Courts: - The provisions hereinafter specified shall not extend 
to Courts constituted under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 or t o Courts 
exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under the said Act, that is to say -- 
(a) so much of this schedule as relates to  
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes or the execution of 
decrees in such suits;  
(ii) the execution of decrees against immovable property or the interest of a partner in 
partnership property;  
(iii) the settlement of issues; and  
(b) the following rules and Orders, -- 
Order II, rule 1 (frame of suit);  
Order X, rule 3 (record of examination of parties);  
Order XV, except so much of rule 4 as provides for the pronouncement at once of 
judgment;  
Order XVIII, rules 5 to 12 (evidence);  
Orders XLI to XLV (appeals);  

Order XLVII, rules 2,3,5,6,7 (review);  
Order LI.  
Leg. Am.: 1. The words and figures " or under the Berar Small Cause Courts Law, 1905" 
which were ins. by the Berar Laws Act 1941 (4 of 1941), S. 2 and Third Sch. have been 
omitted by the A.O., 1949.  
2. The original words "under that Act" have been successively amended by the Berar Law 
Act 194 1 (4 of 1941) and the A.O., 1949 to read as above.  
IHA : K.  
Cross Ref.: S. 7; 0. 20.4.  
ORDER LI  
PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS  
Leg. Am.: 1. Omitted by the A.O., 1949.  
High Court Amendment -Sind. Add the following as Order 52.  
ORDER LII  
1. Applicability of Ru le 38 of Order 41 to proceedings under Section 115. Rule 38 of 
Order 41 shall apply, so far as may be, to proceedings under Section 115 of the Code.  
TITLES OF SUITS  
APPENDIX A  
PLEADINGS  
(1) Titles of Suits  
IN THE COURT OF  
A.B. (add description and residenc e) … Plaintiff  
against  
C. D. (add description and residence) … Defendant  
(2) Description of Parties in Particular Cases  
Pakistan or the Province of, as the case may be  
The Advocate -General of  
The Collector of  
The State of  
The A.B. Company, Limited, having  its registered office at  
A.B., a public officer of the C.D. Company.  
A.B. (add description and residence) on behalf of himself and all other creditors of C.D., 
late of (add description and residence).  
A.B. (add description and residence) on behalf of hims elf and all other holders  
of debentures issued by the Company,  
Limited  

The Official Receiver  
A.B., minor (add description and residence), by C.D., (or by the Court of Wards], his 
next friend.  
A.B. (add description and residence) a person of unsound mind (o r of weak mind], by  
C.D., his next friend  
A.B, a firm carrying on business in partnership.  
A.B, (add description and residence by his constituted attorney C.D (add description and 
residence).  
A.B, (add description and residence), Shebait Thakar.  
FORMS OF PLEADINGS  
A B. (add description and residence) executor of C.D. deceased.  
A.B. (add description and residence), heir of C.D., deceased.  
(3) Plaints  
No. 1 MONEY LENT  
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the_____day of_____19 he lent t he defendant rupees repayable on the ____ day of 
____.  
2. The defendant has not paid the same except _____ rupees paid on the ____ day of 
___19. (If the plaintiff was a minor (or insane) from the ____day of _____ till the 
____day of ___.  
3. The plaintiff was a minor (or insane) from the day of_____.  
4. Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the court has jurisdiction).  
5. The value of the subject matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is____ rupees.  
6. The plaintiff claims____ r upees with interest at _____ percent from the ____ day of 
___19.  
NO. 2 MONEY OVERPAID  
(Title)  
A.B. the above named plaintiff states as follows: - 
1. On the____ day of ____19 the plaintiff agreed to buy and the defendant to sell_____ 
bars of silver at_____an nas per tola of fine silver.  
2. The plaintiff procured the said bars to be assayed by E.F., who was paid by the 
defendant for such assay, and E.F. declared each of the bars to contain 1.500 tolas of fine 
silver, and the plaintiff accordingly paid the defen dant rupees.  
3. Each of the said bars contained only 1,200 tolas of fine silver, of which fact the 
plaintiff was ignorant when he made the payment.  

4. The defendant has not repaid the sum so overpaid.  
(As in paras, 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed ). 
NO. 3. GOODS SOLD AT A FIXED PRICE AND DELIVERED  
(Title)  
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the_____ day of_____ 13, E.P. sold and delivered to the defendant (one hundred 
barrels of flour, or the goods mentioned in the schedule h ereto annexed or sundry goods).  
2. The defendant promised to pay ____ rupees for the said goods on delivery (or on 
the___day of___some day before the plaint was filed].  
3. He has not paid the same.  
4. E.F. died on the______day of 19___ By his last_____wil l he appointed his brother the 
plaintiff, his executor.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1]  
7. The plaintiff as executor of E.F. claims (Relief claimed].  
NO 4 GOODS SOLD AT A REASONABLE PRICE AND DELIVERED  
(Title)  
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, states a s follows :  
1. On the______day of____19, plaintiff sold and delivered to the defendant (sundry 
articles of house -furniture), but no express agreement was made as to the price.  
2 The goods were reasonably worth ________ rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid  the money.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed]  
NO. 5 GOODS MADE AT DEFENDANT'S REQUEST, AND NOT ACCEPTED  
(Title)  
A B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: -  
1. On the_____ day of 19___ , E.F. agreed with the plaintiff that th e plaintiff should 
make for him [tables and fifty chairs] and that E.F. should pay for the goods on 
delivery_____ rupees.  
2. The plaintiff made the goods, and on the______day of 19___ , offered to deliver them 
to E.F., and has ever since been ready and wil ing so to do.  

3. E.F. has not accepted the goods or paid for them.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed]  
NO. 6 DEFICIENCY UPON A RE -SALE GOODS AT AUCTION  
(Title)  
A B , the above -named plaintiff, states as follows - 
1. On the____ day of__ __19___ , the plaintiff put up at auction sundry (goods], subject to 
the condition that all goods not paid, for and removed by the purchaser within (ten days) 
after the sale should be re -sold by auction on his account, of which condition the 
defendant had notice.  
2. The defendant purchased (one crate of crockery] at the auction at the price 
of____rupees.  
3. The plaintiff was ready and willing to deliver the goods to the defendant on the date of 
the sale and for (ten days] after.  
4. The defendant did not tak e away the goods purchased by him nor pay for them within 
(ten days) after the sale, nor afterward.  
5. On the _____ day of ____19__, the plaintiff re -sold the crate of crockery, on account 
of the defendant, by public auction, for____ rupees.  
6. The expen ses attendant upon such re -sale amounted to____ rupees.  
7. The defendant has not paid the deficiency thus arising amounting to_____  
rupees.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed).  
NO. 7 SERVICES AT REASONABLE RATE  
(Title)  
A.B. the above named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. Between the___ day of___ 19 and the ___day of___ 19, plaintiff (executed sundry 
drawings, designs and diagrams) for the defendant, at his request but no express 
agreement was made as to the sum to be paid for such se rvices.  
2. The services were reasonably worth rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed).  

NO 
. 8. SERVICES AND MATERIALS AT A REASONABLE COST  
(Title)  
A B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the____ day of ___19 at the plaintiff built a house [known as No. in ], and  
furnished, the materials therefore, for the defendant at his request, but no express 
agreement was made as to the amount to be paid for such work and materials.  
2. The work done and materials, supplied were reasonably worth ____ rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 Form No. 1)  
NO. 9. USE AND OCCUPATION  
(Title)  
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, executor of the will of X. Y. deceased, s tates as follows:  
1. That the defendant occupied the [House No, _____Street______, by permission of the 
said X.Y. from the day 19, until the ___ day of 19, and no agreement was made as to 
payment for the use of the said premises.  
2. That the use of the sai d premises for the said period was worth ____ rupees.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1)  
4. The plaintiff as executor of Y. X. claims (Relief claimed).  
NO. 10 ON AN AWARD  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff stat es as follows: - 
1. On the ____ day of 19, the plaintiff and defendant having a difference between them 
concerning [a demand of the plaintiff for the price of ten barrels of oil which the 
defendant refused to pay) agreed in writing to submit the difference to the arbitration of £ 
F. 3rd Gd!. and the originals document is annexed hereto.  
2. On the____day of ____ 19 the arbitrators awarded that the defendant should (pay the 
plaintiff_____ rupees).  

3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in para 4 and 5 o f Form No. 1 and relief claimed)  
NO. 11 ON A FOREIGN JUDGMENT  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff states as follows: - 
1. On the ____ day of ____ 19, at _____ in the State [or Kingdom) of _____the Court of 
that State [Kingdom], in a Suit therein pending  between the defendant, duly adjudged that 
the defendant should pay to the plaintiff ____rupees, with interest from the said date.  
2. The defendant has not paid the money.  
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No 1, and Relief claimed]  
NO. 12 AGAINST SURETY FOR PA YMENT OF RENT  
(title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff states as follows: - 
1. On the____ day of___ 19 E. F. hired from the plaintiff for the term of____ years, the 
(House No._____ Street____) at the annual rent of_____ rupees, payable (monthly).  
2. The defe ndant agreed, in consideration of the letting of the premises to E.F. to 
guarantee the punctual payment of the rent.  
3. The rent for the month of____ 19, amounting to rupees, has not been paid.  
(If, by the terms of the agreement, notice is required to be given to the surety, add: - 
4. On the ___ day of ____ 19 the plaintiff gave notice to the defendant of the non -
payment of the rent and demanded payment thereof.  
5. The defendant has not paid the same.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 13 BREACH OF AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE LAND  
A. B. the above named plaintiff states as follows: - 
1. On the ____ day of ____ 19, the plaintiff and defendant entered into agreement and the 
original document is hereto annexed.  
(or, on the______day of ___ 19,. The plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
plaintiff should sell to the defendant and that the defendant should purchase from the 
plaintiff forty bighas of land in the village of _____ for ______ rupees).  

2. On the____day of 19, the plaintiff, b eing then the absolute owner of the property (and 
the same being tree from encumbrances as was made to appear to the defendant], 
tendered to the defendant a sufficient instrument, of transfer of the same (or, was ready 
and willing, and is still ready and w illing, and offered to transfer the same to the 
defendant by sufficient instrument on the payment by the defendant of the sum agreed 
upon.  
3. The defendant has not paid the money.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and relief claimed).  
NO. 14 NOT DELIVERIN G GOODS SOLD  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the_____day of 19 , at______ the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
defendant should deliver [one hundred barrels of flour] to the plaintiff on the____ day of 
19 and that  the plaintiff should pay therefore ______ rupees on delivery.  
2. On the (said) day the plaintiff was ready and willing, and offered to pay the defendant 
the said sum upon delivery of the goods.  
3. The defendant has not delivered the goods and the plainti ff has been deprived of the 
profits which would have accrued to him, from such delivery.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed)  
NO. I5 WRONGFUL DISMISSAL  
(Title)  
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows : - 
1. On the _____ day of_ __ 19, the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the 
plaintiff should serve the defendant as [an accountant or in the capacity of foreman, or as 
the case may be) and that the defendant should employ the plaintiff as such for the term 
of [one year] a nd pay him for his service ______rupees (monthly).  
2. On the____day of ___19, the plaintiff entered upon the service of the defendant and 
has ever since been, and still is, ready and willing to continue in such service during the 
remainder of the said year  whereof the defendant always has had notice.  
3. On the ____day of 19 , the defendant wrongfully discharged the plaintiff, and refused 
to permit him to serve as aforesaid or to pay him for his services.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and relief claimed) . 

NO. 16. BREACH OF CONTRACT TO SERVE  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff states as follows: - 
On the____day of 19 , the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the plaintiff 
should employ the defendant at an annual salary of ______rupees, and that  the defendant 
should serve the plaintiff as An artist for the term of (one year). I  
2. The plaintiff has always been ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement 
(and on the___ day of____19 offered so to do).  
3. The defendant [entered upon] the service of the plaintiff on the above mentioned day, 
but afterwards on the____________day of 19 , he refused to serve the plaintiff as 
aforesaid.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 17. AGAINST A BUILDER FOR DEFECTIVE WORKMANSHIP  
(Title) 
A.B., the above -named plaintiff. states as follows: - 
1. On the______ day of____19 , the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, 
and, the original document is hereto annexed. [or state the tenor of the contract].  
2. The plaintiff duly perform ed all the conditions of the agreement on his part.  
3. The defendant built the house referred to in the agreement in a bad and unworkman 
like manner.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form NO. 1 and relief claimed)  
NO.18 ON A BOND FOR THE FIDELITY OF A CLERK  
(Title)  
A.B, the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the_____day of____19 , the plaintiff took E.F. into his employment as a clerk  
2. In consideration thereof, on the day of ______ 19, the defendant agreed with the 
plaintiff that if E.F. should fail t o account to the plaintiff for all monies, evidences of debt 
or other property received by him for the use of the plaintiff, the defendant would pay to 
the plaintiff whatever loss he might sustain reason thereof, not exceeding ___rupees.  
(Or 2. In conside ration thereof, the defendant by his bond of the same date bound himself 
to pay the plaintiff the penal sum of_____ rupees, subject to the condition that if E.F. 

should faithfully perform his duties of clerk and cashier the plaintiff and should justly 
account to the plaintiff for all monies, evidences of debt or other property which should 
be at any time held by him in trust, for the plaintiff the bond should be void].  
(Or 2. In consideration thereof on the same date the defendant executed a bond in favour  
of the plaintiff and the original document is hereto annexed).  
3. Between the day of l9, and the ___day of___19, E.F. received money and other 
property, amounting to the value of ____rupees, for the use of the plaintiff for which sum 
he has not accounted  to him, and the same still remains due and unpaid.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 19. BY TENANT AGAINST LANDLORD WITH SPECIAL DAMAGE  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the___day of___19 , the defen dant by a registered instrument, let to the plaintiff the 
house No. _____Street____for the term of____ years, constructing with the plaintiff that 
he, the plaintiff, and his legal representatives should quietly enjoy possession thereof for 
the said term.  
2. All conditions were fulfilled and all things happened necessary to entitle plaintiff to 
maintain this suit.  
3. On the___day of___19 , during the said term, E. F., who was the lawful owner of the 
said house, lawfully evicted the plaintiff there from and s till withholds the possession 
thereof from him.  
4. The plaintiff was thereby [prevented from continuing the business of a tailor at the said 
place and was compelled to expend ____rupees in moving, and lost the custom of G.H 
and I. J. by such removal].  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 20 ON AN AGREEMENT OF INDEMNITY  
(Title)  
A. B, the above -named plaintiff states as fellows: - 
1. On the_____day of___19 , the plaintiff and defendant, being partners in trade under 
the style of A.B and C.  D, dissolved the partnership, and mutually agreed that the 
defendant should take and keep all the partnership property, pay all debts of the firm and 
Indemnify the plaintiff against all claims that might be upon him on account of any 
indebtedness of the f irm 

2. The plaintiff duly performed all the conditions of the agreement on his part.  
3. On the___day of__19 , (a Judgment was recovered against the plaintiff and defendant 
by E. F. in the High Court of Judicature at____upon a debt due from the firm to E.F.  and 
on the day of____, the plaintiff paid____rupees (in satisfaction of the same].  
4. The defendant has not paid the same to the plaintiff.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 21. PROCURING PROPERTY BY FRAUD  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the____day of___19, the defendant, for the purpose of inducing the plaintiff to sell 
him certain goods represented to the plaintiff that (he, the defendant, was solvent, and 
worth ___rupees over all his liabilitie s).  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell (and deliver] to the defendant (dry goods) of 
value of ___rupees.  
3. The said representations were false (or state the particular falsehoods and were then 
known by the defendant to be so.  
4. The has not pai d for the goods (or, if the goods were not delivered). The plaintiff, in 
preparing and shipping the goods and procuring their restoration, expended ____ rupees.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 22. FRAUDULENTLY PROCURING CREDIT TO B E GIVEN  
TO ANOTHER PERSON  
(Title)  
A.B, the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the____day of____19 , the defendant represented to the plaintiff that E.F, was 
solvent and in good credit, and worth rupees over all his liabilities [or that E. F. , then held 
a responsible situation and was in good circumstances, might safely be trusted with goods 
on credit].  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell to E.F. (rice] of the value of___rupees (on 
___months credit].  
3. The said representations were  false and were then known by the defendant to be so, 
and were made by him with intent to deceive and defraud the plaintiff deceive and injure 
the plaintiff.  

4. E. F (did not pay for the said goods at the expiration of the period aforesaid, or] has not 
paid for the said rice; and the plaintiff has wholly lost the same.  
(As in paras 4 & 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 23. POLLUTING THE WATER UNDER THE PLAINTIFF'S LAND  
(Title)  
A.B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. The plaintiff is, a nd at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of certain 
land called _______and situate in_____ and of well therein and of water in the well, and 
was entitled to the use and benefit of the well and of the water therein, and to have certain 
sprin gs and streams of water which flowed and ran into the well to supply the same to 
flow or run without being fouled or polluted.  
 
2. On the ____ day of__19, the defendant wrongfully fouled and polluted the well and the 
water therein and the springs and stre ams of water which flowed into the well.  
3. In consequence the water in the well became impure and unfit for domestic and other 
necessary purposes and the plaintiff and his family are deprived of the use and benefit of 
the well and water.  
(As in paras 4 &  5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 24 CARRYING ON A NOXIOUS MANUFACTURE.  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. The plaintiff is and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was possessed of certain 
lands called ____ situated i n _____  
2. Ever since the day 19 , the defendant has wrongfully caused to issue from certain 
smelting works carried on by the defendant large quantities of offensive and 
unwholesome smoke and other vapors and noxious matter, which spread over and upon 
the said lands and corrupted and settled on the surface of the lands.  
3. Thereby the trees, hedges, herbage and crops of the plaintiff growing on the lands were 
damaged and deteriorated. In value, and the cattle and live stock of the plaintiff on the 
lands be came unhealthy, and many of them were poisoned and died.  
4. The plaintiff was unable to graze the lands with cattle and sheep as he otherwise might 
have done, and was obliged to remove his cattle, sheep and farming stock there from, and 
has been prevented from having so beneficial and healthy a use and occupation of the 
lands as he otherwise would have had.  

(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 25. OBSTRUCTING A RIGHT OF WAY  
(Title)  
A.B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was possessed of a house in the 
village of__________.  
2. He was entitled to a right of way from the house over a certain field to a public 
highway and back again from the highway over the field to th e house for himself and his 
servants (with vehicles, or on foot] at all times of the year.  
3. On the _____ day of 19 defendant wrongfully obstructed the said way, so that plaintiff 
could not pass with vehicles, or on foot or in any manner along the way (an d has ever 
since wrongfully obstructed the same.  
4. (State special damage, if any)  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 26. OBSTRUCTING A HIGHWAY  
(Title)  
1. The defendant wrongfully dug a trench and heaped up earth and stones in the p ublic 
highway leading from______ to_______ so as to obstruct it.  
2. Thereby the plaintiff, while lawfully passing along the said highway, fell over the said 
earth and stones (or into the said trench) and broke his arm, and suffered great pain, and 
was pre vented from attending to his business for a long time, and incurred expense for 
medical attendance.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO 27. DIVERTING A WATER -COURSE  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiffs states as follows: - 
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of mill situated 
on a (stream] known as the ________ in the village of _______ district of_______.  
2. By reason of such possession the plaintiff was entitled to the flow of the stream for 
working the mill.  

3. On the ___ day of ____ 19, the defendant, by cutting the bank of the stream, 
wrongfully diverted the water thereof so that less water ran into the plaintiff's mill.  
4. By reason thereof the plaintiff has been unable to grind more tha n sacks per day, 
whereas, before the said diversion of water, he was able to grind___ sacks per.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 28. OBSTRUCTING A RIGHT TO USE WATER IRRIGATION  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as  follows: - 
1. Plaintiff is and was at the time hereinafter mentioned., possessed of certain lands 
situate, etc. and entitled to take and use a portion of the water of a certain stream for 
irrigating the said lands.  
2. On the _____ day_____ l9 ,defendant pr evented the plaintiff from taking and using the 
portion of the said water as aforesaid by wrongfully obstructing and diverting the said 
stream.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 29. INJURIES CAUSED BY NEGLIGENCE ON A RAILROAD  
(Title) 
A. B. the above named plaintiff states as follows: - 
1. On the_____ day of_____19, the defendants were common carriers of passengers by 
railway between______ and______.  
2. On that day the plaintiff was a passenger in one of carriages of the defendants o n the 
said railway.  
3. While he was such passenger, at ____ or near the station of_____ or between the 
stations of ______and ______ a collusion occurred on the said railway caused by the 
negligence and unskill -fullness of the defendant's servants, whereby the plaintiff was 
much injured (having leg, broken, his head cut, etc. and state the special damage, if any 
as) and incurred expense for medical attendance, and is permanently disabled from 
carrying on his former business as a salesman.  
(As in paras 4 and  5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
Or thus: -2. On that day the defendants by their servants so negligently and unskillfully 
drove and managed an engine and a train of carriages attached thereto upon and along the 
defendant's railway which the plaintiff w as then lawfully crossing, that the said engine 
and train were driven and struck against the plaintiff, whereby, etc., as in para 3).  

NO. 30. INJURIES CAUSED BY NEGLIGENT DRIVING  
(Title)  
A. B. above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. The plaintiff is  a shoe -maker, carrying on business at_____. The defendant is a 
merchant of __________.  
On the _____day of____19 , the plaintiff was walking (westward) along (Bunder Road), 
in the city of Karachi at above 3 O'clock in the afternoon. He was obliged to cross  Wood 
Street, which is a Street running into Bunder Road at right angles. While he was crossing 
this street, and just before he could reach the foot -pavement on the further side thereof, a 
carriage of the defendant's servants, was drawn by two horses under  the charge and 
control of the defendant's servants, was negligently, suddenly and without any warning 
turned at a rapid and dangerous pace out of Wood Street into Bunder Road. The pole of 
the carriage struck the plaintiff and knocked him down, and he was much trampled by the 
horses.  
3. By the blow and fail and trampling the plaintiff's left arm was broken and he was 
bruised and injured on the side and back, as well as internally, and in consequence 
thereof the plaintiff was for four months ill and in suffe ring, and unable to attend to his 
business, and incurred heavy medical and other expenses, and sustained great loss of 
business and profits.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 31 FOR MALICIOUS PROSECUTION  
(Title)  
A.B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the ______day of_____ 19, the defendant obtained a warrant of arrest from (((((( a 
Magistrate of the said city or as the case may be) on a charge of ______ and the plaintiff 
was arrested thereon and imprisoned for __ __ days or hours and gave bail in the sum of 
_____ rupees to obtain his release).  
2. In so doing the defendant acted maliciously and without reasonable or probable cause.  
3. On the_____ day of______19 the Magistrate dismissed the complaint of the defenda nt 
and acquitted the plaintiff.  
4. Many persons, whose names are unknown to the plaintiff, hearing of the arrest, and 
supposing the plaintiff to be a criminal, have ceased to do business with him; or in 
consequence of the said arrest, the plaintiff lost hi s situation as clerk to one E. F. or in 
consequence, the plaintiff suffered pain of body and mind, and was prevented from 
transacting his business, and was injured in his credit and incurred expense in obtaining 

his release from the said imprisonment and i n defending himself against the said 
complaint.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 32 MOVABLES WRONGFULLY DETAINED  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the _____ day of ______ 19, plaintiff owned (or st ate facts showing a right to the 
possession) the goods mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed (describe the goods) the 
estimated value of which is _____ rupees.  
2. From that day until the commencement of this suit the defendant has detained the same 
from the plaintiff.  
3. Before the commencement of the suit, to wit, on the ____ day of____19 , the plaintiff 
demanded the same from the defendant but he refused to deliver them.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
6. The plaintiff claims - 
(1) delivery of the said goods, or____ rupees, in case delivery cannot be had;  
(2) rupees compensation for the detention thereof.  
____________  
The Schedule  
____________  
NO. 33 AGAINST A FRAUDULENT PURCHASER AND HIS TRANSFEREE  
WITH NOTICE  
(Title)  
A. B. the  above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the_____day of______ 19, the defendant C.D. for the purpose of inducing the 
plaintiff to sell him certain goods, represented to the plaintiff that was solvent, and worth 
rupees over all his liabilities).  
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell and deliver to C. D. (one hundred boxes of 
tea) the estimated value of which is______rupees.  
3. The said representations were false, and were then known by C.D. to be so (or at the 
time of making the said represen tations. C.D. was insolvent, and knew himself to be so].  

4. C.D. afterwards transferred the said goods to the defendant E. F. without consideration 
who had notice of the falsity of the representation].  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
7. The plaintiff claims: -  
(1) delivery of the said goods, or_______ rupees in case delivery cannot be had;  
(2) rupees compensation the detention thereof  
NO. 34 RESCISSION OF A CONTRACT ON THE GROUND OF MISTAKE  
(Title)  
A.B, the above -named plaintiff, st ates as follows: - 
1. On the day of______ 19, the defendant represented to the plaintiff that a certain piece 
of ground belonging to the defendant, situated at______ contained (ten bighas].  
2. The plaintiff' was thereby induced to purchase the same at the price of____ rupees in 
the belief that the said representation was true, and signed an agreement of which the 
original is hereto annexed but the land, has not been transferred to him.  
3. On the____day of ______ 19, the plaintiff paid the _____ rupees as p art of the 
purchase -money.  
4. That the said piece of ground contained in fact only (five bighas].  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
 
The plaintiff claims: - 
(1)____ rupees with interest from the ____ day of_____ 19,  
(2) that the said a greement be delivered up and cancelled.  
NO. 35 AN INJUNCTION RESTRAINING WASTE  
(Title)  
A.B. the above named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. The plaintiff is the absolute owner of____ (describe the property).  
2. The defendant is in possession of the same under a lease from the plaintiff.  
3. The defendant has (cut down a number of valuable trees, and threatens to cut down 
many more for the purpose of sale) without the consent of the plaintiff.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  

6. The pl aintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or 
permitting any further waste on the said premises.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
NO. 36. INJUNCTION RESTRAINING NUISANCE  
(Title)  
A.B., the above named  plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. Plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, the absolute owner of the 
house No.______ Street____ Karachi.  
2. The defendant is and at all the said times was the absolute owner of a plot of ground in 
the same street _____.  
3. On the ____ day 19, the defendant erected upon his said plot a slaughter -house and still 
maintains the same and from that day until the present time has continually caused cattle 
to be brought and' killed there (and has caused the bl ood and offal to be thrown into the 
Street opposite the said house of the plaintiff.  
4. In consequence the plaintiff has been compelled to abandon the, said house and has 
been unable to send the same.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
7. The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or 
permitting any further nuisance.  
NO. 37 PUBLIC NUISANCE  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff states as follows:  
1. The defendant has wrongly heaped up earth and st ones on a public road known as 
_____ street at_____ so as to obstruct the passage of the public along the same and 
threatens and intends, unless restrained from so doing, to continue and repeat the said 
wrongful act.  
2. The plaintiff has obtained the conse nt in writing of: the Advocate -General (or other 
officer appointed in this behalf] to the Institution of the suit.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  

5. The plaintiff claims -  
(1) a declaration, that the defendant is not entitled to obs truct the passage of the public 
along the said public road.  
(2) an injunction restraining the defendant from obstructing the passage of the public 
along the said public road and directing the defendant to remove the earth and stones 
wrongfully heaped up as  aforesaid.  
 
NO. 38 INJUNCTION AGAINST THE DIVERSION OF WATER.COURSE  
(Title)  
A.B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
[As in Form No. 27)  
The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from diverting the 
water as aforesaid.  
NO. 39. RESTORATION OF MOVABLE PROPERTY THREATENED WITH 
DESTRUCTION AND FOR AN INJUNCTION  
(Title)  
A.B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows - 
1. Plaintiff is and at all, times hereinafter, mentioned was, the owner of (a portrait of his 
grand -father which was executed by an eminent painter) which duplicate exists (or state 
any facts showing that the property is of a kind that cannot be replaced by money).  
2. On the_____day of _____19 he deposited the same for safe -keeping with  
the defendant.  
3. On the ____ day of -____ 19, he demanded the same from the defendant and offered to 
pay all reasonable charges for the storage of the same.  
4. The defendant refuses to deliver the same to the plaintiff and threatens to conceal, 
dispose of, cut or injure the same if required to deliver it up.  
5. No pecuniary compensation would be an adequate compensation to the plaintiff for the 
loss of the (painting).  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1 and Relief claimed)  
8. The plaintiff claims -  
(1) that the defendant be re strained by injunction from disposing of, injuring or 
concealing the said (painting);  

(2) that he be compelled to deliver the same to the plaintiff.  
NO. 40. INTERPLEADER  
(Title)  
A.B., the above -named plaintiff states as follows: - 
1. Before the date of the claims hereinafter mentioned G. H. the plaintiff (describe the 
property) for safe keeping.  
2. The defendant C. D. claims the same (under an alleged assignment thereof to him from 
G.H).  
3. The defendant E. F. also claims the same (under an order of G. H. t ransferring the 
same to him).  
4. The plaintiff is ignorant of the respective rights of the defendants.  
5. He has no claim upon the said property other than for charges and costs, and is ready 
and willing to deliver it to such persons as the Court shall dir ect. 
6. The suit is brought by collusion with either of the defendants.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
9. The plaintiff claims: - 
(1) that the defendants be restrained, by injunction, from taking any proceedings against 
the plaintiff In relation theret o;  
(2) that they be required to Interplead together concerning their claims to the  
said property;  
(3) that some person be authorized to receive the said property pending such litigation.  
(4) that upon delivering the same to such (person] the plaintiff be discharged from all 
liability to either of the defendants In relation thereto.  
NO. 41 ADMINISTRATION BY CREDITOR ON BEHAL.F OF HIMSELF AND  
ALL OTHERS  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. E. F. late of______ was at the time of hi s death, and his estate still is indebted to the 
plaintiff in the sum of ______(here insert nature of debt and security, if any).  

2. E. F. died on or about the_____day of_____by his last will ____dated the____day of 
he appointed C. D. his executor (or devi sed his estate in trust etc. or died intestate, as the 
case may be].  
3. The will was proved by C. D. (or letters of administration were granted etc].  
4. The defendant has possessed himself of the movable (and immovable, or the proceeds 
of the immovable pro perty of E. F. and has not paid the plaintiff his debt.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
7. The plaintiff claims that an account may be taken of the movable [and immovable) 
property of E.F. deceased and that the same may be administered under the decree  of the 
court).  
NO. 42. ADMINISTRATION BY SPECIFIC LEGATES  
(Title)  
(Alter Form No. 41 thus)  
(Omit paragraph 1 and commence paragraph 2) E .F., late of____ died on or about 
the____ day of_____. By his last will, dated, the day of _____ he appointed C. D. h is 
executor, and bequeathed to the plaintiff (here state the specific legacy].  
For paragraph 4 substitute; - 
The defendant is in possession of the movable property of E.F., and, amongst other things 
of the said (here name the subject of the specific beques t). 
For the commencement of paragraph 7 substitute: - 
The plaintiff claims that the defendant may be ordered to deliver to him the said (here 
name and subject of the specific bequest) or that etc.  
NO. 43 ADMINISTRATION BY PECUNIARY LEGATEE  
(Title)  
(Alter Fo rm No. 41 thus)  
(Omit paragraph I and substitute for paragraph 2) E. F. late of________ died on or about 
the____day of_____ he appointed C. D. his executor and bequeathed to the plaintiff a 
legacy of _____rupees.  
In paragraph 4 substitute "legacy" for debt . 
Another Form  
(Title)  

E. F. the above named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. A. B. of K in the _____died on the_____ day of_____ By his last will, dated the_____ 
day of_____ he appointed the defendant and M. N. (who died in the testator's lifetime) 
his e xecutors, and bequeathed his property, whether movable or immovable, to his 
executors in trust, to pay the rents and income thereof to the plaintiff for his life: and after 
his decease, and in default of his having a son who should attain twenty one or a d aughter 
who should attain that age or marry, upon trust as to his immovable property for would 
be the testator's heir -at-law, and as to his movable property for the persons who would be 
the testator's next of kin if he had died intestate at the time of the  death of the plaintiff, 
and such failure of his issue as aforesaid.  
2. The will was proved by the defendant on the____ day of______. The plaintiff has not 
been married.  
3. The testator was at his death entitled to movable and immovable property the 
defend ant entered into the receipt of the rents of the immovable property and got in the 
movable property , he has sold some part of the immovable property.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
6. The plaintiff claims: - 
(1) to have the movable and immovable prope rty of A. B. administered in this court and 
for that purpose to have all proper directions given and accounts taken.  
(2) Such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require.  
NO. 44 EXECUTION TRUSTS  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -mentioned plaintiff , states as follows: - 
1. He is one of the trustees under an instrument of settlement bearing date on  
or about the_____ day of_____ made upon the marriage of E. F. and G. H., the father and 
mother of the defendant (or an instrument of transfer of the estate  and effects of E. F. for 
the benefit of C. D. the defendant, and the other creditors of E. F.).  
2. A. B. has taken upon himself the burden of the said trust and is in possession of (or of 
the proceeds of) the movable and immovable property transferred by the said instrument.  
3. C. D. claims to be entitled to a beneficial interest under the instrument.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
6. The plaintiff is desirous to account for all the rents and profits of the said immovable 
property (and the Proceeds of  the sale of the said or of part of the said, immovable 
property, or movable or the proceeds of the sale of or of part of, the said movable 
property, or the profits accruing to the plaintiff as such trustee in the execution of the said 

trust) and he prays that the Court will take the accounts of the said trust, and also that the 
whole of the said trust estate may be administered in the Court for he benefit of C.D. , the 
defendant and all other persons who may be interested in such administration in the 
presence of C.D. and such other persons so interested as the Court may direct, or that 
C.D. may show good cause to the contrary.  
(N. B. - Where the suit is by a beneficiary, the plaint may be modeled, mutatis  
mutandis on the plaint by a legatee) .  
NO. 45 FORE CLOSURE OR SALE  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. The plaintiff is mortgagee of lands belonging to the defendant.  
2. The following are the particulars of the mortgage: - 
(a) date  
(b) names of mortgagor and mortgagee  
(c) sum se cured  
(d) rate of Interest  
(e) property subject to mortgage  
f) amount now due  
(g) if the plaintiff's title is derivative stare shortly the transfers or devolution  
which he claims).  
(If the plaintiff is mortgagee in possession, add)  
3. The plaintiff took po ssession of the mortgaged property on the ____ day of____ and is 
ready to account as mortgagee in possession from that time.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
6. The plaintiff claims - 
(1) payment or in default (sale or) foreclosure (and possession)  
(Wher e Order 34, rule 6 applies).  
2) in case the proceeds of the sale are found to be insufficient to pay the amount due to 
the plaintiff, then that liberty be reserved to the plaintiff to apply for a decree for the 
balance.  
NO. 46. REDEMPTION  
(Title)  
A. B, the  above -named plaintiff, states as follows - 
1. The plaintiff is mortgagor of lands of which the defendant is mortgagee,  
2. The following are the particulars of the mortgage: - 
(a) (date) ;  

(b) names of mortgagor and mortgagee)  
(c) (sum secured)  
(d) (rate o f interest)  
(e) (property subject to mortgage)  
(f) (If the plaintiff's title is derivative, state shortly the transfers or devolution  
under which he claims).  
(If the defendant is mortgagee in possession, add)  
3. The defendant has taken possession (or has  received the rents) of the mortgaged 
property.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
6. The plaintiff claims to redeem the said property and to have the sari re -conveyed to 
him and to have possession thereof].  
NO. 47. SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE (NO. 1)  
(Title)  
A.B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. By an agreement dated the_____day of_____ and signed by the defendant, he 
contracted to buy of (or sell to) the plaint certain immovable property therein described 
and referred to sum of_______rupees.  
2. The plaintiff has applied to the defendant specifically to perform the agreement on his 
part, but the defendant has not done so.  
3. The plaintiff has been and still is ready and, willing specifically to perform the 
agreement on his part of which the def endant has had not.  
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
6.: The plaintiff claims that the Court will order, the defendant specifically to perform the 
agreement and to do all acts necessary to put the plaintiff in full possession of the said 
property to acc ept a transfer and possession of the said property] and to pay the costs of 
the suit.  
NO. 48 SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE  
(Title)  
A. B., the above -named plaintiff, states as follows: - 
1. On the ___day of______19 the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreeme nt in 
writing and the original document is hereto annexed.  

The defendant was absolutely entitled to the immovable property described in the 
agreement.  
2. On the____ day of____19 , the plaintiff tendered ____rupees to the defendant, and 
demanded a transfer  of the said property by a sufficient Instrument..  
3. On the____day___ 19 the plaintiff again demanded such transfer (or the defendant, 
refused to transfer the same to the plaintiff.  
4. The defendant has not executed any instrument of transfer.  
5. The pla intiff is still ready and willing to the purchase -money of the said property to the 
defendant.  
(As in paras 4 and 2 of Form No. 1)  
8. The plaintiff claims: - 
(l) that the defendant transfer the said property to the plaintiff by a sufficient instrument 
(following the terms of the agreement].  
(2)____rupees compensation for withholding the same.  
NO. 49 PARTNERSHIP  
(Title)  
A. B. the above -named plaintiff, states as follows - 
1. He and C.D. the defendant have been for ____years [or months] past carrying on 
busin ess together under articles of partnership in writing (or under a deed, or under a 
verbal agreement].  
2. Several disputes and differences, have arisen between the plaintiff and defendant as 
such partners whereby it has become impossible to carry on the bus iness in. partnership 
with advantage to the partners (or the defendant has committed the following breaches of 
the partnership articles: - 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1)  
5. The plaintiff claims -. 
(1) dissolution of the partnership  
(2) that accounts be taken  
(3) that a receiver be appointed  

(N. B. -In suits for the winding -up of any partnership, omit the claim for dissolution; and 
instead insert a paragraph stating the facts of the partnership having been dissolved).  
(4) Written Statements  
General Defences  
Denial -The defendant denies that (set out facts).  
The defendant does not admit that (set out facts).  
The defendant admits that____ but says that  
Protest. -The defendant denies that he is a partner and the defendant firm of the plaintiff.  
The defendant denies that he made the contract alleged or any contract with the plaintiff.  
The defendant denies that he contracted with the plaintiff as alleged or at all.  
The defendant admits assets but not the plaintiff's claim.  
The defendant denies that th e plaintiff sold to him the goods mentioned in this plaint or 
any of them.  
Limitation. -The suit is barred by article___ or article of the Second Schedule to the 
(Indian Limitation Act, 1877].  
Jurisdiction. -The: Court has no jurisdiction to hear the suit on the ground that  
(set forth the grounds).  
On the day of a diamond ring was delivered by the defendant to and accepted by the 
plaintiff in discharge of the alleged cause of action.  
Insolvency. -The defendant has been adjudged an insolvent.  
The plaintiff b efore the institution of the suit was adjudged an insolvent and the right to 
sue vested in the receiver.  
Minority. -The defendant was a minor at the time of making the alleged contract.  
Payment into court. -The defendant as to the whole claim (or as to Rs. ) part of the money 
claimed, (or as case may be) has paid into court Rs. and says that this sum is enough to 
satisfy the p claim (or the part aforesaid].  
Performance remitted -The performance of the promise alleged was remitted on the 
____(date).  
Rescissi on-The contract was rescinded by agreement between the plaintiff and defendant.  
Res Judicata --- The plaintiff's claim is barred by the decree in suit (give the reference).  

Estoppel. -The plaintiff is estopped from denying the truth of (insert statement as to which 
estopped is claimed) because (here state the facts relied on as creating the estoppel).  
Ground of defence subsequent to institution of suit. -Since the institution of the suit, that 
is to say, on the day of___ (set out facts).  
NO. I DEFENCE IN SUI TS FOR GOODS SOLD AND DELIVERED  
1. The defendant did not order the goods.  
2. The goods were not delivered to the defendant.  
3. The price was not Rs._____  
or 
4. 1.  
5 . Except as to Rs._____ same as 2.  
6. 3.  
7. The defendant (or A.B. the defendant's agent ], satisfied the claim by payment before 
suit to the plaintiff (or to C. D. the plaintiff's agent] on the day of____19 .  
8. The defendant satisfied the claim by payment after suit to the plaintiff on the___day of 
19__  
No. 2 DEFENCE IN SUITS IN BONDS  
1. The  bond is not the defendant's bond.  
2. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff on the day according to the condition of 
the bond.  
3. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff after the day named and before suit of the 
principal and interest mentioned in the bond.  
No. 3 DEFENCE IN SUITS ON GUARANTEES  
1. The principal satisfied the claim by payment before suit.  
2. The defendant was released by the plaintiff giving time to the principal debtor in 
pursuance of a binding agreement.  
No. 4. DEFENCE IN ANY SUI T FOR DEBT  
1. As to Rs. 200 of the money claimed, the defendant is entitled to set off for goods sold 
and delivered by the defendant to the plaintiff.  
Particulars are as follows: - 
Rs. 
1907, January, 25th ... 150  
February, 1st ... 50  

_____  
Total 200  
_____  
2. As to the whole (or as to Rs.____ part of the money claimed the defendant made tender 
before suit, of Rs.____ and has paid the same into Court.  
No. 5. DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INJURIES CAUSED BY I4EGL DRIVING  
1. The defendant denies that the carriage mention ed in the plaint was the defendant's 
carriage, and that it was under the charge or control of the defendant's servants. The 
carriage belonged to______of___________.  
Street (Karachi) livery stable keepers employed by the defendant to supply him with 
carriag es and horses ; and the person under whose charge and control the said carriage 
was, was the servant of the said.  
2. The defendant does not admit that the said carriage was turned o of (Wood Street) 
either negligently, suddenly or without warning, or at a rapid or dangerous pace.  
3. The defendant says the plaintiff might and could by the exercise of reasonable care and 
diligence, have seen the said carriage approaching him, and avoided any collision with it.  
4. The defendant does not admit the statements co ntained in the third paragraph of the 
plaint.  
No. 6. DEFENCE IN ALL SUITS FOR WRONGS  
1. Denial of the several acts [or matters] complained of.  
No. 7. DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR DETENTION OF GOODS  
1. The goods were not the property of the plaintiff.  
2. The goods  were detained for a lien to which the defendant was entitled.  
Particulars are as follows: - 
1907, May 3rd. To carriage of the goods claimed from (Lahore) to (Karachi): -  
45 maunds at Rs. 2 per maund  
No. 8 DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INFRINGE OF COPYRIGHT  
1. The plaintiff is not the author (assignee etc.).  
2. The book was not registered.  
3. The defendant did not infringe.  
NO. 9. DEFENCE IN SUITS FOR INFRINGEMENT TRADE MARK  

1. The trade mark is not the plaintiff's.  
2. The alleged trade mark is not a trade mark.  
3. The defendant did not infringe.  
 
NO. 10. DEFENCES IN SUITS RELATING TO NUISANCES  
1. The plaintiff's lights are not ancient [or deny his other alleged prescriptive rights.  
2. The plaintiff's lights will not be materially by the defendant's buildings].  
3. T he defendant denies that he or his servants pollute the water [or do what is 
complained of].  
(if the defendant claims the right by prescription or otherwise to do what is complained of 
he must say so, and must state the grounds of the claim i.e. whether by  prescription, grant 
or what].  
4. The plaintiff has been guilty of laches of which the following are particulars: - 
1870. Plaintiff's mill began to work.  
1871 Plaintiff came into possession.  
1883 First complaint.  
5. As to the plaintiff's claim for damages  the defendant will rely on the above grounds of 
defence, and says that the acts complained of have not produced any damage to the 
plaintiff. [if other grounds are relied on, they must be stated, e.g., limitation as to post 
damage.].  
NO. II. DEFENCE TO SUI T FOR FORECLOSURE  
1. The defendant did not execute the mortgage.  
2. The mortgage was not transferred to the plaintiff (if more than one transfer is alleged 
say which is denied).  
3. The suit is barred by article ______of the Second Schedule to the Indian Li mitation 
Act, 1877.  
4. The following payments have been made viz.,  
Rs. 
(Insert late) … … 1,000  
(insert date) ... … 500  
5. The plaintiff took possession on the of______of_____.  
6. That plaintiff released the debt on the______.  

7. The defendant transferred all his interest to A. B. by a document dated_____.  
 
NO. 12 DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR REDEMPTION  
1. The plaintiff's right to redeem is barred by article____ of the Second Schedule to the 
Indian Limitation Act, 1877.  
2. The plaintiff transferred all interest in t he property to A. B.  
3. The defendant by a document dated the____day of transferred all his interest in the 
mortgaged debt and property comprised in the mortgage to A. B.  
4. The defendant never took possession of the mortgaged property or received the rent s 
thereof.  
(If the defendant admits possession for a time only, he should state the time and deny 
possession beyond what he admits).  
NO. 13 DEFENCE TO SUIT FOR. SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE  
1. The defendant did not enter into the agreement.  
2. A. B. was not the a gent of the defendant (if alleged by plaintiff).  
3. The plaintiff has not performed the following conditions -(Conditions)  
4. The defendant did not -(alleged acts of part performance).  
5. The plaintiff's title to the property agreed to be sold is not such as  the defendant is 
bound to accept by reason of the following matter -(State why).  
6. The agreement is uncertain in the following respects -(State them).  
7. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of delay.  
8. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of fraud (or misrep resentation).  
9. (or) The agreement is unfair.  
10. (or) The agreement was entered into by mistake.  
11. The following are particulars of (7), (8), (9), (10), (or as the case may be).  
12. The agreement was rescinded under conditions of Sale No. II (or by mut ual 
agreement).  
(in cases where damages are claimed and the defendant disputes his liability to damages 
he must deny the agreement or the alleged breaches, or show whatever other ground of 
defence he intends to rely on e.g.. the Indian Limitation Act, acco rd and satisfaction, 
release, fraud, etc.)  
NO. 14 DEFENCE IN ADMINISTRATION SUIT BY PECUNIARY LEGATEE  
1. A. B. will contained a charge of debts he died insolvent: he was entitled at his death to 
some immovable property which the defendant sold and which pr oduced the net sum of 

Rs.____ and the testator had some movable property which the defendant got in, and 
which produced the net sum of Rs.____.  
2. The defendant applied the whole of the said sums and the sum of Rs.___ which the 
defendant received from rent s of the immovable property in the payment of the funeral 
and testamentary expenses and some of the debts of the testator.  
3. The defendant made up his accounts and sent a copy thereof to the plaintiff on the  
day of____19 , and offered the plaintiff free a ccess to the vouchers to verify such 
accounts but he declined to avail himself of the defendant's offer.  
4. The defendant submits that the plaintiff ought to pay the costs of this Suit.  
NO. 15 PROBATE OF WILL IN SOLEMN FORM  
1. The said will and codicil of the deceased were not duly executed according to the 
provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1865 [or of the Hindu Wills Act, 1870].  
2. The deceased at the time the said will and codicil respectively purport to have been 
executed, was not of sound mind, m emory and understanding  
3. The execution of the said will and codicil was obtained by the fraud of the plaintiff 
(and others acting with him whose names are at present unknown to the defendant].  
4. The execution of the said will and codicil was obtained by  the fraud of the plaintiff, 
such fraud, so far as is within the defendant present knowledge, being (state the nature of 
the fraud].  
5. The deceased at the time of the execution of the said will (or of the contents of the 
residuary clauses in the said will  as the case may be).  
6. The deceased made his true will, dated the 1st January 1873 there by appointed the 
defendant sole executor thereof.  
The defendant claim: - 
(1) that the court will pronounce against the said, will, and codicil propounded by the 
plaintiff.  
(2) that the court will decree probate of the will of the deceased dated the 1st January, 
1873, in solemn form of law.  
NO. 16. PARTICULARS  
(Title of suit)  

Particulars -The following are the particulars of (here state the matters in respect of which  
particulars have been ordered) delivered pursuant to the order of the____of____.  
(here set out the particulars ordered in paragraphs if necessary)  
APPENDIX B  
PROCESS  
NO. I. SUMMONS FOR DISPOSAL OF SUIT,  
(Title)  
To 
Name, description and place of residence  
WHEREAS  
has instituted a suit against you for________you are hereby summoned to appear in this 
court in person or by a pleader duly instructed, and able to answer all material questions 
relating to the suit, or who shall be accompanied by some person able to answer all such 
questions, on the day of___19 , at___  
O'clock in the noon, to answer the claim and as the day fixed for your appearance is 
appointed for the final, disposal of the suit, you must be prepared to produce on that day 
all the witnesses upon whose evidence and all the documents upon which you intend to 
rely in support of your defence.  
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned the suit will 
be heard and determined in your absence.  
Given under my hand and the se al of the Court, this____day of____19  
Judge  
NOTICE: Should you apprehend your witnesses will not attend of their own accord, you 
can have a summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the 
production of any document that you have a right to call upon the witness to produce, on 
applying to the Court and on depositing the necessary expenses.  
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of 
the suit to avoid execution of the decree, which may be against your person or property or 
both.  
S1ND. Insert the following note in red ink in forms 1, 2. 3, 5 and 6: - 
Also take notice that in default of your filling an address for service on or before the date 
mentioned you are liable to have your defence stru ck out.  

 
NO. 2. SUMMONS FOR SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES  
(Title)  
To 
(Name, description and place of residence)  
WHEREAS  
Has instituted a suit against you for_____ you are hereby summoned to appear in this 
court in person, or by a pleader duly instructed, and able to answer all material questions 
relating to the suit, or who shall be accompanied by some person able to answer all such 
questions, on the day of___19 , at___O' clock in the noon, to answer the claim; and you 
are directed to produce on that day all the do cuments upon which you intend to rely in 
support of your defence to file on or before that date your written statement.  
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will 
be heard and determined in your absence.  
GIVE N under my hand and the seal of the Court, this____ day___of___19  
Judge  
NOTICE: Should you apprehend your witnesses will not attend of their own accord, you 
can have a summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the 
production of a ny document that you have a right to call upon the witness to produce, on 
applying to the Court and on depositing the necessary expenses.  
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of 
the suit, to avoid executio n of the decree, which may be against your person or property, 
or both.  
SIND Sea the Local Amendment of Sind for Form No I Appendix B  
NO. 3 SUMMONS TO APPEAR IN PERSON  
(Name, description and place of residence)  
To 
WHEREAS  
Has instituted a suit against you  for____ you are hereby summoned to appear in this court 
in person on the ____ day of ___ 19 at___ O'clock in ___ noon to answer the claim and 
you are directed to produce on that day all the documents upon which you intend to rely 
in support of your defenc e.  

GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the court this day of ____ 19  
SIND See the Local Amendment of Sind for Form NO. 1 Appendix B.  
NO. 4 SUMMON IN SUMMARY SUIT ON NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT  
(Title)  
To, 
(Name, description and place of residence)  
 
WHEREAS __ ___ has institute a suit against you under Order XXXVII of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, for Rs. ____ balance of principal and interest due to him as the 
_____ of a _____of which a copy is hereto annexed, you are hereby summoned to obtain 
leave from t he Court within ten days from the service hereof to, appear, and defend the 
suit, and within such time to cause an appearance to be entered for you. In default 
whereof the plaintiff will be entitled at any time after the expiration of such ten days to 
obtain a decree for any sum not exceeding the sum of Rs.____ and the sum of Rs._____  
for costs with such interest, if any, from the date of the institution of the suit as the Court 
may order].  
Leave to appear may be obtained on an application to the Court supp orted by affidavit or 
declaration showing that there is a defence to the suit on the merits; or that it is 
reasonable that you should be allowed to appear in the suit.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this____day of____19  
Judge  
NO. 5. NOTICE TO PERSON WHO, THE COURT CONSIDERS, SHOULD BE 
ADDED AS CO -PLAINTIFF.  
(Title)  
To 
(Name, description and place of residence)  
WHEREAS_____has instituted the above suit against______for______and whereas it 
appears necessary that you should be added as a plaint iff in the said suit in order to 
enable the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions 
involved:  
Take notice that you should on or before the____day of___ 19, signify to this Court 
whether you consent to be so added.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this ___day of_____.  

Judge  
SIND. The Local Amendment of Sind for Form No. I, Appendix B.  
NO. 6. SUMMONS TO LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE OF A DECEASED 
DEFENDANT  
(Title)  
To 
WHEREAS the plaintiff_____instituted a suit in this Court on____the___ day of___ 19 , 
against the defendant who has since deceased, and whereas the said plaintiff has made an 
application to this Court alleging that you are the legal representative of the said 
deceased, and desiring that you be made the  defendant in his stead. You are hereby 
summoned to attend in this Court on the____day of____19, at_____a.m. to defend the 
said suit and in default of your appearance on the day specified, the said suit will be 
heard, and determined in your absence.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this____day____of ___19  
Judge  
SIND: The Local Amendment of Sind for Form No. I. Appendix B.  
NO 7. ORDER OR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMONS FOR SERVICE IN THE 
JURISDICI ION OF ANOTHER COURT  
(Title)  
WHEREAS it is stated that _______defendant/witness in the above suit is at present 
residing in _____ it is ordered that a summons returnable on the____day of____19 , be  
forwarded to the_____ court of_____ for service_____ on the said defendant____ 
witness with a duplicate of this p roceeding.  
The court -fee of_____ chargeable in respect to the summons has been realized in this 
Court in stamps,  
Dated 19  
Judge  
NO. 8. ORDERED FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMONS  
TO BE SERVED ON A PRISONER  
(Title)  
The Superintendent of the Jail at____  
UNDER the  provisions of Order V rule 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 a 
summons in duplicate is herewith forwarded for service on the defendant who is a 

prisoner in jail. You are requested to cause a copy of the said summons to be served upon 
the said defenda nt and to return the original to this Court signed by the said defendant, 
with a statement of service endorsed thereon by you.  
Judge  
NO. 9. ORDER FOR TRANSMISSION OF SUMMONS TO BE SERVED  
ON A PUBLIC SERVANT OR SOLDIER.  
(Title)  
To 
UNDER the provisions of Order V, Rule 27 (or 28 as the case may be) of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1908 a summons in duplicate is herewith forwarded for service on 
the defendant___ who is stated to be serving under you. You are requested to cause a 
copy of the said summons to  be served upon the, said defendant and to return the original 
to this Court signed by the said defendant, with a statement of service endorsed thereon 
by you.  
Judge  
NO. 10 TO ACCOMPANY RETURNS OF SUMMONS OF  
ANOTHER COURT  
(Title)  
Read proceeding from the _____ forwarding ______ for service on____ in Suit No.___of 
19__ of that Court.  
Read Serving officer's endorsement stating that the_____ and proof of the above having 
been duly taken by me on the oath of ___ and____ it is ordered that the ____be returned 
to the____with a copy of this proceeding.  
Judge  
NOTE: This from will be applicable to process other summons, the service which may 
have to be effected in the same manner.  
No. 11 AFFIDAVIT OF PROCESS TO ACCOMPANY RETURN  
OF A SUMMONS OR NOTICE  
(Title)  
The affidavit of_____ son of_____, I____make oath/affirm and say as follows: - 
(1) I am a process -server of this Court.  
(2) On the ___ day of ____19, received a summons notice issued by the Court of ___ in 
Suit No. ___of 19 for service on ____.  

(3) The said___ was at the time personally known to me and I served the said 
summons/notice on him/her on the ___ day of ___ 19, at about___ O clock in the ___ 
noon at_____ by tendering a copy thereof to him/her and requiring his/her signature to 
the original summons/noti ce.  
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served signed or refused to sign the process and in 
whose presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or 
(3) The said____ not being personally known to me _______ accompanied me to___ and 
pointed out to me a pe rson whom he stated to be the said ___ and I at about____ O clock 
in the __ non at ___ by tendering a copy thereof to him /her and requiring his/her 
signature to the original summons/notice.  
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served signed or refus ed to sign the process and in 
whose presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
Or 
(3) The said____ and the house in which he ordinarily resides being personally known to 
me, I went to the said house, in___ and thereon the ___ day of __ 19 at about___ O c lock 
in the ___ noon, I did not find the said.  
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special 
reference to Order 5 rule 15 & 17.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
or. 
(3) One___ accompanied me to ___ and there pointed out to me___ which he said was 
the house in which ___ ordinarily resides. I did not find the said ____ there.  
(a) 
(b)  
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special 
reference to Order 5 rules 15 and 17.  

(b) S ignature of process -server.  
or, 
If substituted service has been ordered, state fully and exactly the manner in which the 
summons was served with special reference to the terms of the order for substituted 
service.  
Sworn/Affirmed by the said____ before me t his___ day of ___ 19,  
Empowered under section 139 of time Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to administer the 
oath to deponents.  
LAHORE  
Substitute the following form as amended: - 
No. II. AFFIDAVIT OF PROCESS -SERVER TO ACCOMPANY RETURN  
OF A SUMMONS OR NOTICE  
(Title)  
The affidavit of___son of ____ I, make oath affirm and say as follows: - 
(1) I am a process -server of this Court.  
(2) On the___ day of___ 19, I received summons/notice issued by the Court of  
of ____in Suit No. _____ day of ___ 19, in the said Court dated the_____ day of ____19, 
for service on ____.  
(3) The said ___ was at the time personally known to me and I served the said 
summons/notice on him/her on the ___ day of____ 19, at about ___ o clock in the ___ 
noon at ___ by tendering copy thereof to hi m/her and requiring his/her signature to the 
original summons/notice.  
(a)  
(b)  
(a) Here state whether the person served, signed or refused to sign the process and in  
whose presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server.  
Or 
(3) The said ___ not being persona lly known to me ______ accompanied to ___ and 
pointed out to me a person whom he stated to be the said ___ and I served the said 
summons/notice on him/her___ on the ___ day of ___ 19, at about____ O clock in the 
___ noon at ____ by tendering copy thereof t o him/her and requiring his/her signature the 
original summons/notice.  

(a) 
(b)  
(a) Here state whether the person served, signed or refused to sign the process and in 
whose presence.  
(b) Signature of process -server  
or 
(3) The said ___ and his house in whi ch he ordinarily resides being personally known to 
me/pointed out to me by ____ I went to the said house in ______and there on the ___ day 
of ____ o clock in the fore/after noon I did not find the said___ I enquired  
a) 
b) Neighbors  
I was told that ____ ha d gone___ and would not be back till____  
Signature of process server.  
Or 
If substituted service has been ordered, state fully and exactly the manner in which the 
summons was served with special reference to the terms of the order for substituted 
service.  
____ before me this____ day of ___ 19, .  
Empowered under section 139 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 to administer the oath 
to deponents.  
 
N.W.F.P  
Substitute the following for the third and fourth parts of (3) in form No. 11: - 
(3) The said___ and his house in which he ordinarily resides being personally known to 
me/pointed out to me I went to the said house in ____ and there on the day of ___ 19, at 
about ___ o clock in the fore/after noon, I did not find the said___ I was told that ___ had 
gone to ___ _ and would not be back till____.  
Signature of Process server  
NO. 12 NOTICE TO DEFENDANT  
(Title)  

WHEREAS this day was fixed for the hearing of the above Suit and a summons was 
Issued to you and the plaintiff has appeared In this Court and you did not so ap pear, but 
from the return of the Nazir it has been proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the 
said summons was served on you but not in sufficient time to enable you to appear and 
answer on the day fixed in the said summons;  
Notice is hereby given to  you that the hearing of the suit is adjourned this day and that the 
day of 19 is now fixed for the hearing of the same; in default of your appearance on the 
day last mentioned the suit will be heard and determined in your absence.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this____ day___ of 19__  
Judge  
No. 13 SUMMONS TO WITNESS  
(Title)  
To 
WHEREAS your attendance is required to _____ on behalf of the ____ in the above suit, 
you are hereby required (personally) to appear this court on the day ___of___ 19  , 
O'clock in the forenoon, and to bring with you (or to send to this ___ court).  
A sum of Rs.___ being your traveling and other expenses and subsistence allowance for 
one day, is herewith sent. If you fail to comply with this order without lawful excuse, you 
will be subject to the consequences of non -attendance laid down in rule 12 of Order XVI 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this ___day____of__19  
Judge  
NOTICE: (1) If you are summoned only to produce a d ocument and not to evidence, you 
shall be deemed to have complied with the summons if you cause such document to be 
produced in this Court on the day and hour aforesaid.  
(2) If you are detained beyond the day aforesaid, a sum of Rs._____  
will be tendered t o you for each day's attendance beyond the day specified.  
 
NO. 14. PROCLAMATION REQUIRING ATTENDANCE OF WITNESS  
(Title)  
To  
WHEREAS it appears from the examination on oath of the serving officer that the 
summons could not be served upon the Witness in the  manner prescribed by law and 
whereas it appears that the evidence of the witness is material, and he absconds and keeps 
out of the way for the purpose of evading the service of the summons This proclamation 

is therefore, under rule to Order of the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908, issued requiring 
the attendance of the witness In this court on to the day of___19 , at___O'clock in the 
forenoon and from day to day until he shall have leave to depart; and if the witness fails 
to attend on the day and hour afores aid he will be dealt with according to law.  
GIVEN Under my hand and the seal of the Court this_____ day___of 19  
Judge  
NO. 15 PROCLAMATION REQUIRING ATTENDANCE OF WITNESS  
(Title)  
To, 
WHEREAS It appears from the examination on oath of the serving office that  (he 
summons has been duly served upon the witness, and whereas it appears that the 
evidence of the witness is material and he has failed to attend in compliance with such. 
summons This proclamation is therefore, under rule 10 of Order XVI of the Code of C ivil 
Procedure, 1908, issued, requiring the attendance of the witness in this Court on the____ 
day of___ 19, at____O'clock in the forenoon and from day to day until he shall have 
leave to depart and if the witness fails to attend on the day and hour afores aid he will be 
dealt with according to law.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the court this____ day of ____ 19.  
NO. 16 WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT OF PROPERTY OF  
WITNESS  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  
WHEREAS the witness ______ cited by____ has not, aft er the expiration of the period 
limited in the proclamation issued for his attendance, appeared in Court, you are hereby 
directed to hold under attachment ____property belonging to the said witness to the value 
of _____and to submit a return, accompanied w ith an inventory thereof, within ___days.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this____ of___ 19  
NO. 17 WARRANT OF ARREST OF WITNESS  
(Title)  
To 
The Bailiff of the Court.  

WHEREAS ____ has been duly served with a summons but has failed to attend 
[absconds and keeps out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service of a summons); 
you are hereby ordered to arrest and bring the said ____before the Court.  
You are further ordered to return this warrant on or before the ____day of___19 with an 
endorsemen t certifying the day on and the manner in which it has been executed, or the 
reason why it has not been executed.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this ____ day of 19___  
Judge  
NO. 18 WARRANT OF COMMITTAL  
(Title)  
To 
The Officer in charge of t he Jail at____.  
WHEREAS the plaintiff (or defendant) in the above -named suit has made application to 
his Court that security be taken for the appearance of____ to give evidence (or to produce 
a document) on the ___day of 19__ and whereas the Court has call ed upon the said to 
furnish such security, which he has failed to do; this is to require you to receive the 
said___ into your custody in the civil prison and to produce him before this Court 
at___on the said day and on such other day or days as may be here after ordered.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this___ day of 19__.  
NO. 19. WARRANT OF COMMITTAL  
(Title)  
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at___.  
WHEREAS____ whose attendance is required before this court in the above -named case 
to give e vidence (or to produce a document) has been arrested and brought before the 
Court in custody; and whereas owing to the absence of the plaintiff (or defendant); the 
said cannot give such evidence (or produce such document); and whereas the Court has 
called upon the said ____to give security for his appearance on the ___day of 19__ at 
which he has failed to do; this is to require you to receive the said into your custody in 
the civil prison and to produce him before this Court at___ on the day of 19__.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this___day of 19___.  
Judge  

APPENDIX C  
DISCOVERY, INSPECTION AND ADMISSION  
NO.1. ORDER FOR DELIVERY OF INTERROGATORIES  
In the Court of Civil Suit No. ____ of 19__.  
A. B. … …. …. Plaintiff  
against  
C.D. E.F. and G. H.  … Defendants.  
Upon hearing____ and upon reading the affidavit ___of___ filed the___day of 19__  
It is ordered that the____ be at liberty to deliver to the interrogatories in writing, and that 
the said___ do answer the interrogatories as prescribed by Order  XI, rule 8, and that the 
costs of this application be____.  
NO. 2 INTERROGATORIES  
(Title)  
Interrogatories on behalf of the above -named (plaintiff or defendant C. D.) for the 
examination of the above -named (defendant E.F. and G.H. or plaintiff).  
1. Did not,  etc. 
2. Has not, etc. - 
etc. etc. etc.  
(The defendant E. F. is required to answer the interrogatories numbered).  
(The defendant G.H. is required to answer the interrogatories numbered).  
NO. 3 ANSWER TO INTERROGATORIES  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
The answer  of the above -named defendant E. F. to the interrogatories for hi examination 
by the above -named plaintiff.  
 
In answer to the said interrogatories I, the above named E. F. make oath and say as 
follows: - 
1. Enter answers to interrogatories in paragraph numb ered.  
2. consecutively  
3. I object to answer the interrogatories numbered____on the ground that (state grounds 
of objection).  

NO. 4. ORDER FOR AFFIDAVIT AS TO DOCUMENTS  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
Upon hearing___ do within ___ days it is ordered that the___ do within____days from the 
date of this order, answer on affidavit stating which documents are or have been in his 
possession or power relating to the matter in question in this suit, and that the costs of this 
application be _____.  
NO. 5 ORDER FOR AFFIDAV IT AS TO DOCUMENTS  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
I. the above -named defendant C. D. make oath and say as follows: - 
1. I have in my possession or power the documents relating to the, matters in question in 
this suit set forth in the first and second parts of th e first schedule hereto.  
2. I object to produce the said documents set forth in the second part of the first schedule 
hereto [state grounds of Objection].  
3. I have had but have not now my possession power the document relating to the matters 
in question i n this suit set forth in the second schedule hereto.  
4. The last -mentioned were lost in my possession or power an (state and what has become 
of them and in whose possession they now are].  
5. According to the best of my knowledge, information and belief I h ave not now, and 
never had, in my possession, custody or power or in the possession, custody or power of 
my pleader or agent, or in the possession, custody or power of any other person on my 
behalf, any account, book of account, voucher, receipt, letter me mo randum, paper or 
writing, or any copy of or extract from any such document, or any other document 
whatsoever, relating to the matters in question in this suitor any of them, or wherein any 
entry, has been made relative to such matters or any of them, ot her than and except the 
documents set forth in the said first and second schedules hereto.  
NO. 6 ORDER TO PRODUCE DOCUMENTS FOR INSPECTION  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
Upon hearing _____ and upon reading the affidavit of___ filed the___ day of___ 19, It is 
ordered that the ____ do at all reasonable times on reasonable notice, produce at 
____situate at_____ the following documents, namely____ and that the___ be at liberty 
to inspect and peruse the documents so produced and to make notes of their contents. In 
the meantime it is ordered that all further proceedings be stayed and that the costs of this 
application be ___.  

 
NO 7. NOTICE TO PRODUCE DOCUMENTS  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
Take notice that the [plaintiff or defendant] requires you to produce for his inspe ction the 
following documents referred to in your [plaint or written statement or affidavit, dated 
the___ day of 19__.  
[Describe documents required]  
(X.Y. Pleader for the  
To Z. Pleader for the  
NO. 8 NOTICE TO INSPECT DOCUMENTS  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
Take notice that you can inspect the documents mentioned in your notice of the___day 
of19___ [except the documents numbered____in that notice) at [insert place of 
Inspection) on___ Thursday next, the___ instant between the hours of 12 and 4 O'clock.  
Or, that  the [plaintiff of defendant) objects to giving you inspection of documents 
mentioned in your notice of the ____ day____ 19, on the ground that (state the ground): - 
NO. 9 NOTICE TO ADMIT DOCUMENTS  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
Take notice that the plaintiff ( or defendant) in this suit, proposes to adduce in evidence 
the several documents hereunder specified, and that the same may be inspected by the 
defendant [or plaintiff], his pleader or agent, at____ on_____ between the ____hours 
of_____ and the defendant [ or plaintiff) is hereby required within forty -eight hours from 
the last mentioned hour to admit. that such of the, said documents, as are specified to be 
originals were respectively written signed or executed as they purport respectively to 
have been , tha t such as are specified as copies are true copies . and such documents as 
are stated to have been served, sent or delivered was so served sent or delivered were so 
served, sent or delivered, respectively, saving all just exceptions to the admissibility of all 
such documents as evidence in this suit  
G. H. Pleader [or agent] for plaintiff (or defendant):  
To E. F., pleader (or agent for defendant).  
(here describe the documents and specify as to each document whether it is original or a 
copy)  
NO. 10. NOTICE TO ADMIT FACTS  
(Title as in No. I supra)  

Take notice that the plaintiff [or defendant] in this suit requires the defendant [or 
plaintiff] to admit, for the purposes of this suits only, the several facts respectively 
hereunder specified; and the defendant [o r plaintiff) is hereby required, within six days 
from the service of this notice, to admit the said several facts, saying all just exceptions to 
the admissibility of such facts as evidence in this suit.  
G. H. pleader [or agent] for plaintiff (or defendant ) 
To E.F, pleader [or agent] for defendant [or plaintiff].  
The facts, the admission of which is required, are: - 
1. That M died on the 1st January, 1890.  
2. That he died intestate.  
3. That N was his only lawful son.  
4. That O died on the 1st April, 1996.  
5. That O was never married.  
NO. II; ADMISSON OF FACTS PURSUANT TO NOTICE  
(Title as in No. 1 supra)  
The defendant (or plaintiff) in this suit, for the purposes of this suit only, hereto admits 
the several facts respectively hereunder specified subject to th e qualifications or 
limitations, if any, hereunder specified, saving all just exceptions to the admissibility of 
any such facts, or any of them, as evidence in this suit:  
Provided that this admission is made for the purposes of this suit only, and is not a n 
admission to be used against the defendant [or plaintiff] on any other occasion or by any 
one other than the plaintiff (or defendant, or party requiring the admission).  
E. F. pleader (or agent) for defendant (or plaintiff)  
To G, H., pleader [or agent] fo r plaintiff [or defendant).  
  
  
  
  
 
NO. 12 NOTICE TO PRCDUCE (GENERAL FORM)  
(Title as in No. I supra)  
Take notice that you are hereby required to produce and show to the Court at the first 
hearing of this suit all books, papers, letters, copies of letters  and other writing and 

documents. In your custody, possession or power containing any entry, memorandum or 
minute relating to the matters in question in this Suit, and particularly.  
G. H. pleader [or agent] for plaintiff (or defendant)  
To E. F. pleader [o r agent for defendant it (or plaintiff)  
APPENDIX D  
DECREE  
NO. 1 DECREE IN ORIGINAL SUIT  
(Title)  
Claim for ____.  
This suit coming on this day for final disposal before___ in the presence____ for the 
plaintif and of___ for the defendant, it is ordered and de creed that___ and that the sum of 
Rs.___ be paid by the ___ to the ___ on account of the costs of this suit, with interest 
thereon at the rate of per cent ___ per annum from this date to date of realization.  
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the court, this ___ day of ___ 19  
Judge  
Costs of Suits  
  
  
  
  
  
NO. 2. SIMPLE MONEY DECREE (Section 34)  
(Title)  
Claim for_____  
This suit coming on___ this day for final disposal before in the presence of___ for the 
plaintiff and of___ for the defendant, it is order ed that the ___ do pay to the ___ the sum 
of Rs. ____ with interest thereon at the rate of ___per cent per annum from___  
to the date of realization of the said sum and do also pay Rs. ____ the costs of this suit, 
with interest thereon at the rate of____ pe r cent per annum from this date to the  
date of realization.  

GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this_____ day of 19  
Judge  
NO. 3 PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
Order XXXIV rule, 2 --Where accounts are directed to be taken)  
(Title)  
This suit coming on this_____ day. etc. It is hereby ordered and decreed that it be 
referred to ____as the Commissioner to take the accounts of following: - 
(1) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and interest on his 
mortgage mention ed in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the 
principal or where no such rate is fixed, at six per cent per annum or at such rate as the 
Court deems reasonable);  
(ii) an account of the income of' the mortgaged property received up to this date by the 
plaintiff or by any other person by the order or for the use of the plaintiff or which 
without the willful default of the plaintiff or such person might have been so received;  
(iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred b y the plaintiff up to this date for, 
co charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage -
security, together with interest thereon (such interest to be computed at the rate agreed 
between the parties, or, failing such rate at the same rate as is payable on the principal, or 
falling both such rates, at nine per cent per annum);  
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date 
by any act or omission of the plaintiff which is destructive o f or permanently injurious to, 
the property or by his failure to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law 
for the time being force or by the terms of the mortgage -deed.  
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received u nder clause (ii) 
or adjudged due under clause (iv) above, together with interest thereon, shall first be 
adjusted against any sums paid by the plaintiff under clause (iii) together with interest 
thereon, and the balance, if any shall be added to the mortga ge money or, as the case may 
be, debited in reduction of the amount to the plaintiff on account of interest on the 
principal sum adjusted due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the principal.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commi ssion shall present the amount to 
this Court with all convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before 
the___ day of____ and that upon such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall 
be confirmed and counter signed, subject to suc h modifications as may be necessary after 
consideration of such objections as the parties to the suit may make.  
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed - 

(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the day of____ or any later date up 
to wh ich time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court shall 
find due, and the sum of Rs.___ for the costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff.  
(ii) that on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix 
of such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such 
costs, charges d expenses as may be payable under rule together with such subsequent 
Interest as may be payable under rule II of Order XXXIV of the first schedule to the  
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall bring into Court all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he appoints, 
and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the said property free from 
the said mortgage and clear of and from all encumbrances created by the plaintiff or any 
person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims  and free from all 
liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall if so required, deliver 
up to quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default, of payment as afor esaid, 
the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree that the defendant 
shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem 
the mortgaged property described in the schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property, and that the 
parties shall at liberty to apply to Court from time to time as they may have occasion, and 
on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit.  
 
SCHEDULE  
NO. 3A. PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXIV, rule 2 -Where the Court declares amount due)  
(Title)  
This suit coming on this__ day etc. It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
plaintif f on his mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this___ day of____as 
the sum Rs.____ for the sum of Rs.___ for principal, the sum of Rs.___ for interest on the 
principal, the sum of Rs. ___ for costs charges and expenses (other than the costs of  the 
suit property incurred by the plaintiff in respect of the mortgage security, together with 
interest thereon, and the sum of Rs. ___ for the costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff, 
making in all the sum of Rs. ____.  
It is hereby ordered and decreed  as follows: - 
That the defendant do pay into court on or before the ___ day of ____ or any later date up 
to which time for payment may be extended to the court of the said sum of Rs. ____.  
(ii) that on such payment and on payment thereafter before such dat e as the Court may fix 
of such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs, of the suit and 

such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such 
subsequent Interest as may be payable under rule II., of Order  XXXIV of the First 
Schedule to Code of the Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall bring into Court alt 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint 
mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to t he defendant, or to such 
person as he appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re -convey or re -transfer the 
said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all encumbrances created 
by the plaintiff or any person under whom he clai ms and free from all liability 
whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall if so required, deliver up to 
the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said property.  
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that in default of p ayment as aforesaid the 
plaintiff may apply to the Court for a final decree that the defendant shall thenceforth 
stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged -
property in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall if so  required, deliver up to the 
plaintiff quiet and peaceable pos of the said property; and that the parties shall be at 
liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as the may have occasion, and on such 
application or otherwise the Court may give such dir ections as it thinks fit.  
 
SCHEDULE  
Description of the mortgage property  
No. 4 FINAL DECREE FOR FORECLOSURE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 3)  
(Title)  
Upon reading the preliminary decree passed in this suit on the____ day of___ and further 
orders (if any) dated the ___ _ day of____ and the application of the plaintiff dated the 
______ day of_____ for a final decree and after hearing the parties and it appearing that 
the payment directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the defendant or 
any person on his  behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the said mortgage;  
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the defendant and all, persons claiming through or 
under him be and they are hereby absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right 
of redempti on of and in the property in the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned; (if 
the defendant be in possession of the said mortgaged property that the defendant shall 
deliver to the plaintiff quite and peaceable possession of the said mortgaged property.  
2. A nd it is hereby further declared, that the whole of the liability whatsoever of the 
defendant up to this day arising from the said mortgage mentioned in the plaint or from 
this suit is hereby discharged and extinguished.  
No 5 PRELIMINARY DECREE FOR SALE  
(Order XXXIV, rule 4 -Where accounts are directed to be taken)  
(Title)  

This suit coming on this _____ day, etc , it is hereby ordered and decided that it be 
referred to _____ as the Commissioner to take the accounts following:  
(i) an account of what is due o n this date to the plaint for principal and interest on his 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint (such interest be computed at the rate payable on the 
principal or where no such rate is fixed, at six per cent. per annum or at such rate as the 
Court deems reaso nable);  
   
  Facts admitted.  
1. That M died on the 1st January 1890  
2. That he died intestate  
3. That N was his lawful son  
4. That O died  
5. That O was never married.  
Qualifications or limitations, if any, subject to which they are admitted.  
1.  
2. 
3. But not that he was his only lawful son.  
4. But not that he died on the 1st April, 1896  
5. 
Plaintiff  Defendant  
                
1. Stamp for plaint    
2. Do for power    
3. Do for exhibits    
4. Pleader's fee on Rs.    
 

