Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 1Principles of Islamic
Jurisprudence
by
M. H. Kamali

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 2 Table of Contents• Foreword• Preface• Chapter One: Introduction to Usul al-Fiqh• Chapter Two: The First Source of Shari'ah: The Qur'an• Chapter Three: The Sunnah• Chapter Four: Rules of Interpretation I: Deducing the Law from Its Sources• Chapter Five: Rules of Interpretation II: Al-Dalalat (Textual Implications)• Chapter Six: Commands and Prohibitions• Chapter Seven: Naskh (Abrogation)• Chapter Eight: Ijma' or Consensus of Opinion• Chapter Nine: Qiyas (Analogical Deduction)• Chapter Ten: Revealed Laws Preceding the Shari'ah of Islam• Chapter Eleven: The Fatwa of a Companion• Chapter Twelve: Istihsan, or Equity in Islamic Law• Chapter Thirteen: Maslahah Mursalah (Considerations of Public Interest)• Chapter Fourteen: 'Urf (Custom)• Chapter Fifteen: Istishab (Presumption of Continuity)• Chapter Sixteen: Sadd al-Dhara'i (Blocking the Means)• Chapter Seventeen: Hukm Shar'i (Law or Value of Shari'ah)• Chapter Eighteen: Conflict of Evidences• Chapter Nineteen: Ijtihad, or Personal Reasoning

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 3PrefaceI. Apart from the fact that the existing works on Islamic Jurisprudence in the English language do not
offer an exclusive treatment of usul al-fiqh, there is also a need to pay greater attention to the source
materials, namely the Qur'an and sunnah, in the study of this science. In the English works, the
doctrines of usul al-fiqh are often discussed in relative isolation from the authorities in which they are
founded. Furthermore, these works tend to exhibit a certain difference of style and perspective when
they are compared to the Arabic works on the subject. The usul al-fiqh as a whole and all of the various
other branches of the Shari’ah bear testimony to the recognition, as the most authoritative influence and
source, of divine revelation (wahy) over and above that of rationality and man-made legislation. This
aspect of Islamic law is generally acknowledged, and yet the relevance of wahy to the detailed
formulations of Islamic law is not highlighted in the English works in the same way as one would
expect to find in the works of Arabic origin. I have therefore made an attempt to convey not only the
contents of usul al-fiqh as I found them in Arabic sources but also the tone and spirit of the source
materials which I have consulted. I have given frequent illustrations from the Qur’an, the Sunnah and
the well-recognised works of authority to substantiate the theoretical exposition of ideas and doctrines.
The works of the madhahib, in other words, are treated in conjunction with the authority in which they
are founded.
II. The idea to write this book occurred to me in early 1980 when I was teaching this subject to
postgraduate students at the Institute of Islamic Studies at McGill University in Montreal. But it was
only after 1985 when I started a teaching post at the International Islamic University, Selangor,
Malaysia, that I was able to write the work I had intended. I was prompted to this decision primarily by
the shortage of English textbooks on Islamic jurisprudence for students who seek to acquire an
intermediate to advanced level of proficiency in this subject. Works that are currently available in
English on Islamic law and jurisprudence are on the whole generic in that they tend to treat a whole
range of topics both on usul al-fiqh and the various branches of fiqh (i.e. furu 'al-fiqh ), often within the
scope of a single volume. The information that such works contain on usul al-fiqh is on the whole
insufficient for purposes of pursuing a full course of study on this subject. The only exception to note
here, perhaps, is the area of personal law, that is, the law of marriage, divorce, inheritance, etc., which
has been treated exclusively, and there are a number of English texts currently available on the subject.
Works of Arabic origin on usul al-fiqh are, on the whole, exclusive in the treatment of this discipline.
There is a selection of textbooks in Arabic, both classical and modern, at present available on this
subject, ranging from the fairly concise to the more elaborate and advanced. Works such as 'Abd al-
Wahhab Khallaf's 'Ilm Usul al-Fiqh, Abu Zahrah's Usul  al-Fiqh, Muhammad al-Khudari's Usul al-Fiqh,
and Badran's Usul al-Fiqh al-lslami are but some of the well-known modern works in the field.
Classical works on usul al-fiqh, of which there are many, are, broadly speaking, all fairly elaborate,
sometimes running into several volumes. I have relied, in addition to the foregoing, on al-Ghazali's Al-

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 4Mustasfa min 'llm al-usul, al-Amidi's Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, al-Shatibi's Al-Muwafaqat fi Usul al-
Ahkam and al-Shawkani's Irshad al-Fuhul fi Tahqiq al-Haqq min 'llm al-Usul. These are all devoted,
almost exclusively, to the juridical subject matter of usul al-fiqh, and rarely, if ever, address the
historical development of this discipline beyond such introductory and incidental references as the
context may require. Arabic writers tend to treat the historical development of jurisprudence separately
from the usul al-fiqh itself. There are several Arabic works of modern origin currently available on the
history of jurisprudence and its various phases of development, namely the Prophetic period, the era of
the Companions, the early schools of law in the Hijaz and Iraq, the emergence of the madhahib, the era
of imitation (taqlid), and the call for a return to ijtihad. This discipline is generally known as 'tarikh al-
tashri' which, as the title suggests, is primarily concerned with the history of juristic thought and
institutions. [Note for example al-Khudari's, Tarikh al-Tashri' al-lslami; al-Sabuni et al., Al- Madkhal al-Fiqhi wa Tarikh al-Tashri al-Islami; al-Qattan's
Al-Tashri' wa al-Fiqh fi al-Islam: Tarikhan wa Manhajan, and al-Nabhan's Al-Madkhal li al-Tashri' al-islami. Nish'atuh, Adwaruh al-Tarikhiyyah, Mustaqbalub.
For full publication data see my Bibliography.] The Arabic texts on usul al-fiqh itself are on the whole devoted to a
treatment of the sources, and methodology of the law, and tend to leave out its history of development.
The reverse of this is true with regard to works that are currently available on the general subject of
Islamic jurisprudence in the English language. Works of Western authorship on this subject are, broadly
speaking, primarily concerned with the history of jurisprudence, whereas the juridical subject matter of
usul al-fiqh does not receive the same level of attention as is given to its historical development.
Bearing in mind the nature of the existing English literature on the subject, and the fact that there is
adequate information available on the history of Islamic jurisprudence in English, the present work does
not attempt to address the historical developments and instead focuses on usul al-fiqh itself.
Another point to be noted regarding works on Islamic jurisprudence in English by both Muslim and
non-Muslim authors is that they are somewhat selective in their treatment of the relevant topics, and
certain subjects tend to be ignored or treated only briefly. Consequently, information on some topics,
such as the rules of interpretation, classification of words, commands and prohibitions, and textual
implications (al-dalalat) is particularly brief and often non-existent in these works. Even some of the
more familiar topics such as qiyas, istihsan, istislah, istishab and saad al-dhara'i are treated
superficially in most of the English books that are currently in use. The reasons for such omissions are
not always clear. The authors might have considered some of these topics to be somewhat technical and
involved for English readers whose interest in usul al-fiqh has for a long time remained confined to
general and introductory information on the subject. Some of these topics, such as the rules of
interpretation, al-dalalat and the technicalities of qiyas which draw somewhat heavily on the use of
Arabic terminology, might have been viewed in this light. The English-speaking student of Islamic
studies has been perceived as someone who would have little use for technical detail on usul al-fiqh.
This might at best offer a plausible explanation, but it is one which carries little weight, especially in
view of the greater interest that has been more recently taken in Islamic legal studies in the West, as
well as some of the English speaking institutions of higher learning that have emerged in Islamic

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 5countries themselves. [Note for example the International Islamic University of Malaysia, and that of Islamabad, Pakistan, where usul al-fiqh is
offered as a core subject both in the LL.B and the masters degree programmes.] Moreover, the fact that Islamic countries have in
recent decades shown a fresh interest in developing greater harmony between the Shari’ah and statutory
laws has also meant that practicing lawyers and judges in these countries are increasingly encouraged to
enhance their expertise in the Shari’ah disciplines.
Modern Arabic writings on usul al-fiqh tend to differ from the older works on the subject in that the
former take cognizance of recent developments both in the Muslim communities and beyond. Thus, the
reader of many a modern work often comes across comments and comparisons which seek to explain
the application and relevance of the Shari’ah doctrines to modern legislation, and to the principles of
Western jurisprudence. Much to their credit, some ulema and writers of modern works have attempted
to relate the classical formulations and doctrines of usul al-fiqh to the contemporary socio-legal
conditions of their communities. There exists a level of concern over the gap that has gradually
developed between the Shari’ah and modern law and over the fact that the problem still remains to be
tackled.
There have also been attempts, be they in the form of individual reform proposals, a call for fresh
ijtihad over particular issues, or formal resolutions adopted at national and international gatherings of
scholars, which seek to tap the resources of usul al-fiqh in bridging the gap between the Shari’ah and
modern conditions of society. A full account of such developments would fall well beyond the scope
and objective of the present work. [For an account of the recent trends and developments in scholarly publications, conference resolutions, and
the various periodicals and encyclopedias which are designed to promote such tendencies, the reader is referred to Muhammad Faruq al-Nabhan, Al- Madkhal li al-
Tashri al-Islami, pp 342-407 and Manna al-Qattan, Al-Tashri’ wa al-Fiqh fi al-lslam, pp . 311-355.] But in discussing certain doctrines such
as ijtihad, ijma', istihsan and maslahah, I have attempted to present the modern current of opinion, and
occasionally my own views, as to how these principles could be utilised in contemporary legal and
judicial processes. I have taken this liberty despite the awareness that it might fall beyond the brief of a
work which seeks to be an exposition of the existing doctrines and institutions as they are. I wish to add
here that I alone bear full responsibility for the propriety or otherwise of my views. 
Furthermore, the recent Arabic texts on usul al-fiqh tend to treat their subject matter in a more
consolidated and simplified form which makes it manageable to the modern student of law. These
works are on the whole more concise by comparison with the earlier authorities on the subject. It is
primarily in matters of format and style in which they differ from the older works. As for substantive
matters, the modern works are normally expected to preserve the continuity of the earlier authorities,
and the two are basically indistinguishable in this regard. Having said this, one might add further that
the modern works tend to differ from their predecessors in one other respect, namely that the former
tend to offer a more even-handed treatment of the views and doctrines of such schools of thought as the
Mu'tazilah, the Shi'ah and the Zahiriyyah, etc., and tend to treat ideas on merit rather than their formal
acceptance and recognition by the established madhahib. In addition to the textbook materials on usul

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 6al-fiqh, a number of legal encyclopedias have emerged in recent decades in Egypt and elsewhere,
usually bearing the title al-Mawsu'ah al-Fiqhiyyah' with the express purpose of offering a balanced
treatment of the views and contributions of all the prominent schools of law. As a result, the relatively
stronger orientation toward particular schools that is noticeable in the earlier works on usul al-fiqh,
especially those that were authored after the crystallisation of the madhahib, is not a prominent feature
of the modern works. A more open attitude has in fact emerged which seeks to move away from the
sectarian bias that can be found in some earlier works, and it is no longer unusual for a Sunni scholar to
write on Shi’i thought, scholars and institutions, with a view to highlighting their contributions to
Islamic law and jurisprudence. The present writer welcomes this development, but if his own work fails
to offer adequate coverage of the doctrines of the various schools, it is due solely to considerations of
brevity and space which may be expected of a handbook of this size.
III. It is perhaps true to say that Islamic jurisprudence exhibits greater stability and continuity of values,
thought and institutions when compared to Western jurisprudence. This could perhaps be partially
explained by reference to the respective sources of law in the two legal systems. Whereas rationality,
custom, judicial precedent, morality and religion constitute the basic sources of Western law, the last
two acquire greater prominence in Islamic Law. The values that must be upheld and defended by law
and society in Islam are not always validated on rationalist grounds alone. Notwithstanding the fact that
human reason always played an important role in the development of Shari'ah through the medium of
ijtihad, the Shari’ah itself is primarily founded in divine revelation.
A certain measure of fluidity and overlap with other disciplines such as philosophy and sociology is
perhaps true of both Islamic and Western jurisprudence. But it is the latter which exhibits the greater
measure of uncertainty over its scope and content. Thus according to one observer, books that bear the
title 'jurisprudence' vary widely in subject matter and treatment, because the nature of the subject is
such that no distinction of its scope and content can be clearly determined, [Dias, Jurisprudence, p. I.] and in
Julius Stone's somewhat dramatic phrase, jurisprudence is described as 'a chaos of approaches to a
chaos of topics, chaotically delimited'. [See this and other statements by Bentham, Dicey and Arnold in Curzon, Jurisprudence , p. 13.]Usul al-fiqh, on the other hand, has a fairly well defined structure, and the ulema had little difficulty in
treating it as a separate discipline of Islamic learning. Textbooks on usul al-fiqh almost invariably deal
with a range of familiar topics and their contents are on the whole fairly predictable. This is perhaps
reflective of the relative stability that the Shari’ah in general and the usul al-fiqh in particular has
exhibited through its history of development, almost independently of government and its legislative
organs. This factor has, however, also meant that usul al-fiqh has for the most part been developed by
individual jurists who exerted themselves in their private capacity away from the government
machinery and involvement in the development of juristic thought. Consequently, usul al-fiqh has to
some extent remained a theoretical discipline and has not been internalised by the legislative machinery
of government. The history of Islamic jurisprudence is marred by a polarisation of interests and values

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 7between the government and the ulema. The ulema's disaffection with the government did not
encourage the latter's participation and involvement in the development of juristic thought and
institutions, and this has to some extent discouraged flexibility and pragmatism in Islamic
jurisprudence. Note, for example, the doctrinal requirements of ijma' , especially the universal consensus
of the entire body of the mujtahidun of the Muslim community that is required for its conclusion, a
condition which does not concede to considerations of feasibility and convenience. There is also no
recognition whatsoever of any role for the government in the doctrine of ijma' as a whole. The
government for its part also did not encourage the ulema's involvement and participation in its
hierarchy, and isolated itself from the currents of juristic thought and the scholastic expositions of the
ulema. The schools of jurisprudence continued to grow, and succeeded in generating a body of doctrine,
which, however valuable, was by itself not enough to harness the widening gap between the theory and
practice of law in government. One might, for example, know about qiyas and maslahah, etc., and the
conditions which must be fulfilled for their valid operation. But the benefit of having such knowledge
would be severely limited if neither the jurist nor the judge had a recognised role or power to apply it.
One might add here also the point that no quick solutions are expected to the problem over the
application of the Shari’ah in modern jurisdictions. The issue is a long- standing one and is likely to
continue over a period of time. It would appear that a combination of factors would need to be
simultaneously at work to facilitate the necessary solutions to the problem under discussion. One such
factor is the realisation of a degree of consensus and cooperation between the various sectors of society,
including the ulema and the government, and the willingness of the latter, to take the necessary steps to
bring internal harmony to its laws. To merge and to unify the Shari’ah and modern law into an organic
unity would hopefully mean that the duality and the internal tension between the two divergent systems
of law could gradually be minimised and removed.
Bearing in mind the myriad and rapidly increasing influences to which modern society is exposed, the
possibility of consensus over values becomes ever more difficult to obtain. To come to grips with the
fluctuation of attitude and outlook on basic values that the law must seek to uphold has perhaps become
the most challenging task of the science of jurisprudence in general. To provide a set of criteria with
which to determine the propriety or otherwise of law and of effective government under the rule of law,
is the primary concern of jurisprudence.
The Muslim jurist is being criticised for having lost contact with the changing conditions of
contemporary life in that he has been unable to relate the resources of Shari’ah to modern government
processes in the fields of legislation and judicial practice. A part of the same criticism is also leveled
against the government in Islamic countries in that it has failed to internalise the usul al-fiqh in its
legislative practices. The alleged closure of the door of ijtihad is one of the factors which is held
accountable for the gap that has developed between the law and its sources on the one hand and the
changing conditions of society on the other. The introduction of statutory legislation which has already
become a common practice in Islamic countries has also affected the role and function of ijtihad. Apart

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 8from circumventing the traditional role of the jurist/ mujtahid , the self-contained statutory code and the
formal procedures that are laid down for its ratification have eroded the incentive to his effective
participation in legislative construction. Furthermore, the wholesale importation of foreign legal
concepts and institutions to Islamic countries and the uneasy combinations that this has brought about
in legal education and judicial practice are among the sources of general discontent. These and many
other factors are in turn accountable for the Islamic revivalism/resurgence which many Muslim
societies are currently experiencing.
In view of the diverse influences and the rapid pace of social change visible in modern society it is
perhaps inevitable to encounter a measure of uncertainty in identifying the correct balance of values.
But the quest to minimise this uncertainty must remain the central concern of the science of
jurisprudence. The quest for better solutions and more refined alternatives lies at the very h eart of
ijtihad , which must, according to the classical formulations of usul al-fiqh, never be allowed to
discontinue. For ijtihad is wajib kafa’i , a collective obligation of the Muslim community and its
scholars to exert themselves in order to find solutions to new problems and to provide the necessary
guidance in matters of law and religion. But even so, to make an error in ijtihad is not only tolerated but
is worthy of reward given the sincerity and earnestness of the mujtahid who attempts it. And it is often
through such errors that the best solution can ultimately be reached. One can have different solutions to
a particular problem, and sometimes the best solution may be known and yet unattainable given the
feasibility and practical considerations that might limit one's range of choice. In such situations one
must surely do that which is possible under the circumstances. But it is imperative not to abandon
ijtihad  completely. It is a common and grave error to say that ijtihad is unattainable and that the
conditions for its exercise are too exacting to fulfill. To regulate ijtihad is indeed the primary objective
of usul al-fiqh and of whatever it has to teach regarding the sources of law and the methods of
interpretation and deduction. A grasp of the concepts and doctrines of usul al-fiqh is not only helpful
but necessary to ijtihad so as to enable the Muslim jurist and legislator to contribute to the on-going
search for better solutions to social issues, and hopefully also toward the development of the outlook
that the Shari’ah, despite its restraints, also possesses considerable flexibility and resources to
accommodate social change.
IV. With regard to the translation of technical Arabic terms, I have to some extent followed the existing
works, especially Abdur Rahim's Principles of Muhammadan Jurisprudence. But in the absence of any
precedent, or when I was able to find a better alternative, I have improvised the equivalent English
terms myself. Most of the Arabic terms are easily convertible into English without engaging in
technicalities, but there are occasions where this is not the case, and at times the choice of terms is
determined on grounds of consistency and style rather than semantic accuracy. To give an example, one
of the chapters in this book is devoted to the discussion of textual implications (al-dalalat). The five
varieties of textual implications, namely 'ibarah al-nass, isharah al-nass, dalalah al-nass, iqtida al-nass
and mafhum al-mukhalafah, each signify a different concept for which an exact English equivalent is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 9difficult to find. I have always tried to give priority to semantic accuracy, but as can be seen this is not
the only factor which has determined my choice of 'explicit meaning', 'alluded meaning', 'implied
meaning', 'required meaning' and 'divergent meaning' for the foregoing terms respectively. For at times
like this, it becomes difficult to be semantically exact as the shades of meaning and concepts tend to be
somewhat overlapping. A measure of technicality and arbitrariness in the choice of terms is perhaps
inevitable in dealing with certain topics of usul al-fiqh such as the classification of words and the rules
of interpretation. On such occasions, I thought it helpful not to isolate the English terms from their
Arabic originals. I have therefore repeated the Arabic terms frequently enough to relate them to their
English equivalents in the text. But when the reader is not sure of the meaning of technical terms a look
at the glossary, which appears at the end of the text might prove useful.
The translation of the Qur'anic passages which occur in the text is generally based on Abdullah Yusuf
Ali's translation of the Holy Qur'an. On occasion, however, I have substituted elements in this
translation for easier and more simplified alternatives. But whenever I have done so, it is usually the
result of my having checked more than one translation. The reader will also notice that I have not given
the original of the Qur’anic passages in Arabic, as this is not difficult to find. Besides, the Qur’anic text
is uniform and there is no variation in the wording of its text in all of its numerous printings that are
commonly used. But when it comes to the Hadith, although the main authorities on Hadith are inclined
to maintain consistency in both the concept and wording of the Hadith, it is nevertheless not unusual to
come across inconsistency or variation in the exact wording of a particular Hadith in various sources.
Partly for this reason, but also for the sake of accuracy and convenience, I have given both the Arabic
original and the English translation of the Hadith on first occurrence in the text. The English rendering
of the Hadith consists for the most part of my own translation of the Arabic original, otherwise I have
used the English translation as and when it was available.
A word may also be in order here regarding the English rendering of the terms fiqh and usul al-fiqh.
The difference between them is fairly obvious in their respective Arabic usages: usul al-fiqh is
unequivocal in its reference to the 'roots of fiqh'. This is, however, not so clear in the equivalent English
terms, which are currently in use. The terms 'Muhammadan Law' and 'Islamic Law' have often been
used in a generic sense and applied both to fiqh and usul al-fiqh. The same is true of its familiar
alternative, 'Islamic jurisprudence'. None of these convey the clarity, which is found in their Arabic
equivalents. There are, for example, books currently available in English bearing one or the other of the
these titles, although their contents do not seek to distinguish the two disciplines from one another.
The term 'Muhammadan Law' seems to be already falling out of use, and it has almost become an
established practice to reserve 'Islamic Law' for fiqh, and 'Islamic jurisprudence' for usul al-fiqh. This
use of terminology should be retained. A similar distinction between the term’s 'source' and 'proof'
would seem advisable. The former should, as far as possible, be reserved for the Qur’an and Sunnah,
and the latter for other proofs.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 10My transliteration of Arabic words is essentially the same as that of the Encyclopedia of Islam (New
Edition), with two exceptions, which have become standard practice: q for k and j for dj.
And finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank most warmly my colleagues and students at
the Faculty of Law, International Islamic University, with whom I have frequently raised and discussed
matters of mutual interest. I have often benefited from their views, which I have taken into account in
writing the present work. I would also like to thank the secretarial staff of the faculty for their unfailing
willingness to type for me whenever I have approached them. And last but not least, I wish to thank the
library staff of the I.I.U. for their assistance, and for being courteous and helpful.
V. Since the publication of the first edition of this book in April 1989, the comments, observations and
responses that I have received from scholars, students, and readers have been very positive and
encouraging. The changes that I have carried out for the present edition of the book relate to both its
content and format, although the overall approach to these changes was to leave the bulk of the original
work intact. The changes that I have made are on the whole confined to particular parts and they do not
entail a recomposition of the original text. I have thus added fresh information and elaborated parts of
the chapters on abrogation (naskh), analogical reasoning (qiyas), and presumption of continuity
(istishab). The new information either consists of the elaboration of concepts or insertion of additional
illustrations for purposes of clarity and relevance to contemporary concerns over the themes of Islamic
jurisprudence. The addition to the chapter on naskh thus reflects the results of a discussion over a paper
entitled 'The Nature, Sources and Objective of the Shari’ah' which I presented to a symposium
organised by the International Islamic University in Kuala Lumpur in September 1989. The additions to
some of the other chapters consist mainly of fresh research and expert opinion on the potential
contribution of some of the neglected principles of usul al-fiqh such as istishab to modern
jurisprudence. I have also refined minor portions of the text in the interest of clarity and precision.
As for the changes of format these were carried out as a result of my consultation with the editorial staff
of the Islamic Texts Society, particularly Mohsen al-Najjar and T. J. Winter. It was thus agreed at the
outset to re-set the whole of the original text so as to implement the standard practice of the Islamic
Texts Society concerning transliteration, footnotes and minor editorial changes in the text. It is thus
hoped that these changes have assured the production of a smoother and more familiar text for its
readers in Europe and America.
Professor Ahmad Ibrahim, Professor Emeritus and Dean of the Faculty of Law, International Islamic
University, Malaysia, has contributed a new Foreword for the second edition. He was kind enough to do
so despite his numerous other commitments, and preoccupation with his own writings. I take this
opportunity to thank him most warmly for his valuable contribution, and the fact that he wrote a
Foreword to both the first and the present editions of my book. He has taken a keen interest in my

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 11research and has been most helpful and understanding in relieving me from other commitments so as to
be able to concentrate on writing and research.
Students and colleagues at the International Islamic University have been generous and supportive of
my endeavours. I take this opportunity to thank them once again for their thoughtful appreciation. A
tangible result of all this is that this book has now become a recommended text in a number of courses
not only in the Faculty of Law but also in other faculties and departments of this University.
Mohammad Hashim Kamali
International Islamic University, Malaysia.
March, 1991.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 12Chapter One : Introduction to Usul al-Fiqh1. Definition and ScopeUsul al-fiqh , or the roots of Islamic law, expound the indications and methods by which the rules of fiqh
are deduced from their sources. These indications are found mainly in the Qur'an and Sunnah , which are
the principal sources of the Shari'ah . The rules of fiqh are thus derived from the Qur'an and Sunnah  in
conformity with a body of principles and methods which are collectively known as usul al-fiqh . Some
writers have described usul al-fiqh  as the methodology of law, a description which is accurate but
incomplete. Although the methods of interpretation and deduction are of primary concern to usul al-
fiqh, the latter is not exclusively devoted to methodology. To say that usul al-fiqh  is the science of the
sources and methodology of the law is accurate in the sense that the Qur’an and Sunnah  constitute the
sources as well as the subject matter to which the methodology of usul al-fiqh  is applied. The Qur’an
and Sunnah  themselves, however, contain very little by way of methodology, but rather provide the
indications from which the rules of Shari’ah  can be deduced. The methodology of usul al-fiqh  really
refers to methods of reasoning such as analogy ( qiyas ), juristic preference ( istihsan ), presumption of
continuity ( istishab ) and the rules of interpretation and deduction. These are designed to serve as an aid
to the correct understanding of the sources and ijtihad .
To deduce the rules of fiqh from the indications that are provided in the sources is the expressed
purpose of usul al-fiqh . Fiqh  as such is the end product of usul al-fiqh ; and yet the two are separate
disciplines. The main difference between fiqh and usul al-fiqh  is that the former is concerned with the
knowledge of the detailed rules of Islamic law in its various branches, and the latter with the methods
that are applied in the deduction of such rules from their sources. Fiqh , in other words, is the law itself
whereas usul al-fiqh  is the methodology of the law. The relationship between the two disciplines
resembles that of the rules of grammar to a language, or of logic ( mantiq ) to philosophy. Usul al-fiqh  in
this sense provides standard criteria for the correct deduction of the rules of fiqh from the sources of
Shari’ah . An adequate knowledge of fiqh necessitates close familiarity with its sources. This is borne
out in the definition of fiqh, which is 'knowledge of the practical rules of Shari’ah  acquired from the
detailed evidence in the sources'. [Amidi, Ihkam , I, 6; Shawkani, Irshad , P. 3.] The knowledge of the rules of fiqh, in
other words, must be acquired directly from the sources, a requirement which implies that the faqih
must be in contact with the sources of fiqh. Consequently a person who learns the fiqh in isolation from
its sources is not a faqih . [Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 6] The faqih  must know not only the rule that
misappropriating the property of others is forbidden but also the detailed evidence for it in the source,
that is, the Qur’anic ayah (2:188) which provides: 'Devour not each other's property in defiance of the
law.' This is the detailed evidence, as opposed to saying merely that 'theft is forbidden in the Qur'an'.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 13Knowledge of the rules of interpretation is essential to the proper understanding of a legal text. Unless
the text of the Qur’an or the Sunnah  is correctly understood, no rules can be deduced from it, especially
in cases where the text in question is not self-evident. Hence rules by which one is to distinguish a
speculative text from the definitive, the manifest ( zahir ) from the explicit ( nass), the general ( 'aam )
from the specific ( khaas ), the literal ( haqiqi ) from the metaphorical ( majazi ) etc., and how to
understand the implications ( dalalat ) of a given text are among the subjects which warrant attention in
the study of usul al-fiqh . An adequate grasp of the methodology and rules of interpretation also ensures
the proper use of human reasoning in a system of law which originates in divine revelation. For
instance, analogy ( qiyas ) is an approved method of reasoning for the deduction of new rules from the
sources of Shari’ah . How analogy should be constructed, what are its limits, and what authority would
it command in conjunction, or in conflict, with the other recognized proofs are questions which are of
primary concern to usul al-fiqh . Juristic preference, or istihsan , is another rationalist doctrine and a
recognized proof of Islamic law. It consists essentially of giving preference to one of the many
conceivable solutions to a particular problem. The choice of one or the other of these solutions is
mainly determined by the jurist in the light of considerations of equity and fairness. Which of these
solutions is to be preferred and why, and what are the limits of personal preference and opinion in a
particular case, is largely a question of methodology and interpretation and therefore form part of the
subject matter of usul al-fiqh .
The principal objective of usul al-fiqh  is to regulate ijtihad  and to guide the jurist in his effort at
deducing the law from its sources. The need for the methodology of usul al-fiqh  became prominent
when unqualified persons attempted to carry out ijtihad , and the risk of error and confusion in the
development of Shari'ah  became a source of anxiety for the ulema. The purpose of usul al-fiqh  is to
help the jurist to obtain an adequate knowledge of the sources of Shari’ah  and of the methods of juristic
deduction and inference. Usul al-fiqh  also regulates the application of qiyas , istihsan , istishab , istislah ,
etc., whose knowledge helps the jurist to distinguish as to which method of deduction is best suited to
obtaining the hukm shar'i  of a particular problem. Furthermore, usul al-fiqh  enables the jurist to
ascertain and compare strength and weakness in ijtihad  and to give preference to that ruling of ijtihad
which is in close harmony with the nusus.
It may be added here that knowledge of the rules of interpretation, the 'Aam , the Khaas , the Mutlaq , the
Muqayyad , etc., is equally relevant to modern statutory law. When the jurist and the judge, whether a
specialist in the Shari’ah  or in secular law, fails to find any guidance in the clear text of the statute on a
particular issue, he is likely to resort to judicial construction or to analogy. The skill, therefore, to
interpret a legal text and to render judicial decisions is indispensable for a jurist regardless as to whether
he sits in a Shari’ah  court or in a court of statutory jurisdiction. A specialist in usul al-fiqh  will thus find
his skill of considerable assistance to the understanding and interpretation of any legal text. [Cf. Badran, Usul ,
pp. 37-38.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 14To what extent is it justified to say that al-Shafi'i was the founder of usul al-fiqh ? One theory has it that
usul al-fiqh  has existed for as long as the fiqh has been known to exist. For fiqh could not have come
into being in the absence of its sources, and of methods with which to utilize the source materials. [Cf. Abu
Zahrah, Usul  p. 8ff.] This would in turn, imply that usul al-fiqh  had existed long before al-Shafi'i. Numerous
examples could be cited to explain how in early Islam, the Companions deduced the rules of fiqh from
their sources. Usul al-fiqh , in other words, had substantially existed before the period which saw the
emergence of the leading imams of jurisprudence. But it was through the works of these imams,
especially al-Shafi'i, that usul al-fiqh  was articulated into a coherent body of knowledge. Even before
al-Shafi'i, we know that Abu Hanifah resorted to the use of analogy and istihsan  while lmam Malik is
known for his doctrine of the Madinese ijma' , subjects to which we shall have occasion to return. When
al-Shafi’i came on the scene, he found a wealth of juristic thought and advanced levels of
argumentation on methodological issues. But the existing works were not entirely free of discordance
and diversity which had to be sifted through by the standards which al-Shafi'i articulated in his legal
theory of the usul. He devoted his Risalah  exclusively to this subject, and this is widely acknowledged
to be the first work of authority on usul al-fiqh .
It is nevertheless accurate to say that fiqh precedes the usul al-fiqh  and that it was only during the
second Islamic century that important developments took place in the field of usul al-fiqh . [Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 16;
Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 10.] For during the first century there was no pressing need for usul al-fiqh . When the
Prophet was alive, the necessary guidance and solutions to problems were obtained either through
divine revelation, or his direct ruling. Similarly, during the period following the demise of the Prophet,
the Companions remained in close contact with the teachings of the Prophet and their decisions were
mainly inspired by his precedent. Their proximity to the source and intimate knowledge of the events
provided them with the authority to rule on practical problems without there being a pressing need for
methodology. [Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 16; Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 16-17] However, with the expansion of the territorial domain of
Islam, the Companions were dispersed and direct access to them became increasingly difficult. With
this, the possibility of confusion and error in the understanding of the textual sources became more
prominent. Disputation and diversity of juristic thought in different quarters accentuated the need for
clear guidelines, and the time was ripe for al-Shafi'i to articulate the methodology of usul al-fiqh . Al-
Shafi’i came on the scene when juristic controversy had become prevalent between the jurists of
Madinah and Iraq, respectively known as Ahl al-Hadith and Ahl al-Ra'y. This was also a time when the
ulema of Hadith had succeeded in their efforts to collect and document the Hadith. Once the fuqaha
were assured of the subject matter of the Sunnah , they began to elaborate the law, and hence the need
for methodology to regulate ijtihad  became increasingly apparent. The consolidation of usul al-fiqh  as a
Shari’ah  discipline was, in other words, a logical conclusion of the compilation of the vast literature of
Hadith. [Cf. Badran, Usul , P. 12.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 15And finally among the factors which prompted al-Shafi'i into refining the legal theory of usul al-fiqh
was the extensive influx of non-Arabs into Islamic territories and the disconcerting influence that this
brought on the legal and cultural traditions of Islam. Al-Shafi'i was anxious to preserve the purity of the
Shari’ah  and of the language of the Qur’an. In his Risalah , al-Shafi'i enacted guidelines for ijtihad  and
expounded the rules governing the Khaas  and the 'Aam , the nasikh  and the mansukh , and articulated the
principles governing ijma'  and qiyas . He expounded the rules of relying on the solitary Hadith ( khabar
al-wa’hid ) and its value in the determination of the ahkam . Al-Shafi’i refuted the validity of istihsan
and considered it to be no more than an arbitrary exercise in law-making. Admittedly al-Shafi’i was not
the first to address these matters, but it is widely acknowledged that he brought a coherence to usul al-
fiqh, which had hitherto remained scattered and unconsolidated. [Cf. Badran, Usul , P. 14.]It will be noted in this connection that the Shi'i ulema have claimed that their fifth Imam, Muhammad
al-Baqir, and his son and successor, Ja'far al-Sadiq, were the first to write on the subject of usul.
According to Abu Zahrah, who has written extensively on the lives and works of the early Imams, the
Shi’i Imams have written, like many others, on the subject, but neither of the two Imams have written
anything of an equivalent order to that of the Risalah . Hence al-Shafi'i's position and contribution to
usul al-fiqh  remains unique, and he is rightly regarded as the founder of usul at-fiqh . [Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 113.
Badran, Usul , P. 14.]The basic outline of the four principal sources of the law that al-Shafi’i spelled out was subsequently
accepted by the generality of ulema, although each of the various schools of jurisprudence has
contributed towards its further development. The Hanafis, for example, added istihsan , and custom
('urf) to the usul al-fiqh , and the Malikis reduced the concept of consensus ( ijma' ) to the Madinese
consensus only, while the Hanbali approach to the subject closely resembled that of the Malikis. But
even so, none departed significantly from the basic principles which al-Shafi'i had articulated. [Badran, Usul ,
P. 14.]Broadly speaking, the so-called closure of the gate of ijtihad  at around the fourth Islamic century did
not affect the usul al-fiqh  in the same way as it might have affected the fiqh itself. The era of imitation
(taqlid ) which followed might even have added to the strength and prominence of usul al-fiqh  in the
sense that the imitators observed, and relied on, the methodology of the usul as a yardstick of validity
for their arguments. Consequently usul al-fiqh  gained universal acceptance and was, in a way, utilised
as a means with which to justify taqlid .  [Badran, Usul , P. 14.]A brief word may be added here regarding the difference between the usul, and the maxims of fiqh (al-
qawa'id al-fiqhiyyah ), as the two are sometimes confused with one another. The maxims of fiqh refer to
a body of abstract rules which are derived from the detailed study of the fiqh itself. They consist of
theoretical guidelines in the different areas of fiqh such as evidence, transactions, matrimonial law', etc.
As such they are an integral part of fiqh and are totally separate from usul al-fiqh . Over 200 legal

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 16maxims have been collected and compiled in works known as al-ashbah wa al-naza'ir ; [Two well known works
both bearing the title Al-Ashbah wa al-Naza'ir  are authored by Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti and Ibn Nujaym al-Hanafi respectively.] one hundred of these,
have been adopted in the introductory section (i.e. the first 100 articles) of the Ottoman Majallah . The
name 'al-qawa'id al-fiqhiyyah ' may resemble the expression usul al-fiqh , but the former is not a part of
the latter and the two are totally different from one another.
A comparison between usul al-fiqh  and usul al-qanun  will indicate that these two disciplines have much
in common with one another, although they are different in other respects. They resemble one another
in that both are concerned with the methodology of the law and the rules of deduction and
interpretation; they are not concerned with the detailed rules of the law itself. In the case of the law of
property, for example, both usul al-fiqh  and usul al-qanun  are concerned with the sources of the law of
property and not with the detailed rules governing transfer of ownership or regulating the contract of
sale. These are subjects which fall within the scope of the law of property, not the methodology of law.
Although the general objectives of usul al-fiqh  and usul al-qanun  are similar, the former is mainly
concerned with the Qur’an, Sunnah , consensus, and analogy. The sources of Shari'ah  are, on the whole,
well-defined and almost exclusive in the sense that a rule of law or a hukm shar'i  may not be originated
outside the general scope of its authoritative sources on grounds, for example, of rationality ( aql) alone.
For 'aql is not an independent source of law in Islam . Usul al-fiqh  is thus founded in divine ordinances
and the acknowledgement of God's authority over the conduct of man.
Usul al-qanun , on the other hand, consist mainly of rationalist doctrines, and reason alone may
constitute the source of many a secular law. Some of these are historical sources such as Roman Law or
British Common Law whose principles are upheld or overruled in light of the prevailing socio-
economic conditions of society. The sources of Shari'ah  on the other hand, are permanent in character
and may not be overruled on grounds of either rationality or the requirement of social conditions. There
is, admittedly, a measure of flexibility in usul al-fiqh  which allows for necessary adjustments in the law
to accommodate social change. But in principle the Shari'ah  and its sources can neither be abrogated
nor subjected to limitations of time and circumstance. The role of the jurist and the mujtahid  in usul al-
fiqh is basically one of deduction and inference of rules which are already indicated on the sources,
while this is not necessarily the case with regard to usul al-qanun . The Parliament or the legislative
assembly of a Western state, being the sovereign authority, can abrogate an existing statute or introduce
a new law as it may deem fit. The legislative organ of an Islamic state, on the other hand, cannot
abrogate the Qur'an or the Sunnah , although it may abrogate a law which is based on maslahah  or
istihsan , etc. Abrogation is, on the whole, of a limited application to the definite rulings of divine
revelation and has basically come to an end with the demise of the Prophet. [Cf. Badran, Usul ., PP. 41-43]Sovereignty in Islam is the prerogative of Almighty God alone. He is the absolute arbiter of values and
it is His will that determines good and evil, right and wrong. It is neither the will of the ruler nor of any

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 17assembly of men, not even the community as a whole, which determines the values and the laws which
uphold those values. In its capacity as the vicegerent of God, the Muslim community is entrusted with
the authority to implement the Shari'ah , to administer justice and to take all necessary measures in the
interest of good government. The sovereignty of the people, if the use of the word 'sovereignty' is at all
appropriate, is a delegated, or executive sovereignty ( sultan tanfidhi ) only. [Cf. Zaydan, al-Fard wa al-Dawlah , p. 29.]Although the ,consensus or ijma'  of the community, or of its learned members, is a recognised source of
law in Islam, in the final analysis, ijma'  is subservient to divine revelation and can never overrule the
explicit injunctions of the Qur’an and Sunnah . The role of the ballot box and the sovereignty of the
people are thus seen in a different light in Islamic law to that of Western jurisprudence.
And lastly, unlike its Western counterpart, Islamic jurisprudence is not confined to commands and
prohibitions, and far less to commands which originate in a court of law. Its scope is much wider, as it
is concerned not only with what a man must do or must not do, but also with what he ought to do or
ought not to do, and the much larger area where his decision to do or to avoid doing something is his
own prerogative. Usul al-fiqh  provides guidance in all these areas, most of which remain outside the
scope of Western jurisprudence.II. Two Approaches to the Study of Usul al-fiqhFollowing the establishment of the madhahib  the ulema of the various schools adopted two different
approaches to the study of usul al-fiqh , one of which is theoretical and the other deductive. The main
difference between these approaches is one of orientation rather than substance whereas the former is
primarily concerned with the exposition of theoretical doctrines, the latter is pragmatic in the sense that
theory is formulated in light of its application to relevant issues. The difference between the two
approaches resembles the work of a legal draftsman when it is compared to the work of a judge. The
former is mainly concerned with the exposition of principles whereas the latter tends to develop a
synthesis between the principle and the requirements of a particular case. The theoretical approach to
the study of usul al-fiqh  is adopted by the Shafi’i school and the Mutakallimun, that is the ulema of
kalam  and the Mu'tazilah . The deductive approach is, on the other hand, mainly attributed to the
Hanafis. The former is known as usul al-Shafi'iyyah  or tariqah al-Mutakallimin , whereas the latter is
known as usul al-Hanafiyyah , or tariqah al-fuqaha' .
Al-Shafi’i was mainly concerned with articulating the theoretical principles of usul al-fiqh  without
necessarily attempting to relate these to the fiqh itself. As a methodologist par excellence , he enacted a
set of standard criteria which he expected to be followed in the detailed formulation of the rules of fiqh.
His theoretical exposition of usul al-fiqh , in other words, did not take into consideration their practical

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 18application in the area of the furu'. In addition, the Shafi'is and the Mutakallimun are inclined to engage
in complex issues of a philosophical character which may or may not contribute to the development of
the practical rules of fiqh. In this way subjects such as the 'ismah  of the prophets prior to their prophetic
mission, and matters pertaining to the status of the individual or his duties prior to the revelation of the
Shari’ah , and also logical and linguistic matters of remote relevance to the practical rules of fiqh tend to
feature more prominently in the works of the Shafi’is and Mutakallimun than those of the Hanafis. The
Hanafis have on the other hand attempted to expound the principles of usul al-fiqh  in conjunction with
the fiqh itself and tend to be more pragmatic in their approach to the subject. In short, the theoretical
approach tends to envisage usul al-fiqh  as an independent discipline to which the fiqh must conform,
whereas the deductive approach attempts to relate the usul al-fiqh  more closely to the detailed issues of
the furu al-fiqh . When, for example, the Hanafis find a principle of usul to be in conflict with an
established principle of fiqh, they are inclined to adjust the theory to the extent that the conflict in
question is removed, or else they try to make the necessary exception so as to reach a compromise.
Three of the most important works which adopt the theoretical approach to usul al-fiqh  are Al-
Mu'tamad fi Usul al-Fiqh  by the Mu'tazili scholar, Abu al-Husayn al-Basri (d. 436), Kitab al-Burhan  of
the Shafi’i scholar, Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwayni (d. 487) and Al-Mustasfa  of Imam Abu Hamid al-
Ghazali (d. 505). These three works were later summarised by Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606) in his work
entitled Al-Mahsul . Sayf A-Din al-Amidi's larger work, Al-Ihkam fi usul al-Ahkam  is an annotated
summary of the three pioneering works referred to above.
The earliest Hanafi work on usul al-fiqh  is Kitab fi al-Usul  by Abu al-Hasan al-Karkhi (d. 340) which
was followed by Usul al-Jassas  of Abu Bakr al-Razi al-Jassas (d. 370). Fakhr al-Islam al-Bazdawi's (d.
483) well-known work, Usul al-Bazdawi , is also written in conformity with the Hanafi approach to the
study of this discipline. This was followed by an equally outstanding contribution by Shams al-Din al-
Sarakhsi (d. 490) bearing the title, Usul al-Sarakhsi . A number of other ulema have contributed to the
literature in both camps. But a difference of format which marked a new stage of development was the
writing of handbooks in the form of mukhtasars with a view to summarise the existing works for
didactic purposes.
The next phase in the development of literature on usul al-fiqh  is marked by the attempt to combine the
theoretical and deductive approaches into an integrated whole which is reflected in the works of both
the Shafi’i and Hanafi ulema of later periods. One such work which attempted to combine al-Bazdawi's
Usul  and al-Amidi's Al-Ihkam  was completed by Muzaffar al-Din al-Sa'ati (d. 694) whose title Badi' al-
Nizam al-Jami 'Bayn Usul al-Bazdawi wa al-Ihkam  is self-explanatory as to the approach the author has
taken to the writing of this work. Another equally significant work which combined the two approaches
was completed by Sadr al-Shari'ah, 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud al-Bukhari (d. 747) bearing the title Al-
Tawdih , which is, in turn, a summary of Usul al-Bazdawi , Al-Mahsul , and the Mukhtasar al-Muntaha  of
the Maliki jurist. Abu Umar Uthman b. al-Hajib (d. 646). Three other well-known works which have
combined the two approaches to usul al-fiqh  are Jam' al-Jawami  of the Shafi'i jurist Taj al-Din al-Subki

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 19(d. 771), Al-Tahrir  of Kamil al-Din b. al-Humam al-Hanafi (d. 860), and Musallam  al-Thubut  of the
Hanafi jurist Muhibb al-Din b. 'Abd al-Shakur (d. 1119). And finally, this list would be deficient
without mentioning Abu Ishaq Ibrahim al-Shatibi's Al-Muwafaqat , which is comprehensive and perhaps
unique in its attention to the philosophy ( hikmah ) of tashri'  and the objectives that are pursued by the
detailed rulings of the Shari’ah . [Abu Zahrah, Usul , PP. 14-20; Hitu, Wajiz , pp. 13-24; Zuhayr, Usul , I, 4.]III. Proofs of Shari'ah ( Al-Adillah Al-Shar'iyyah )The adillah Shar’iyyah , and the ahkam , that is, laws or values that regulate the conduct of the mukallaf ,
are the two principal themes of usul al-fiqh . Of these two, however, the former is by far the more
important as, according to some ulema, the ahkam  are derived from the adillah  and are therefore
subsidiary to them. It is perhaps in view of the central importance of these two topics to usul al-fiqh  that
al-Amidi defines the latter as the science of the 'Proofs of fiqh (adillah al-fiqh ) and the indications that
they provide in regard to the ahkam  of the Shari'ah . [Amidi, Ihkam , I, 7; Badran, Usul , P. 36.]Literally, dalil means proof, indication or evidence. Technically it is an indication in the sources from
which a practical rule of Shari’ah , or a hukm  is deduced. The hukm  so obtained may be definitive
(qat’i' ) or it may be speculative ( zanni ) depending on the nature of the subject, clarity of the text, and
the value which it seeks to establish. [Amidi, Ihkam , I. 9; Badran, Usul , P. 46, Hitu, Wajiz , p. 99.] In the terminology of usul
al-fiqh, adillah Shar’iyyah  refer to four principal proofs, or sources of the Shari’ah , namely the Qur’an,
Sunnah , consensus and analogy. Dalil  in this sense is synonymous with asl, hence the four sources of
Shari’ah  are known both as adillah  and usul. There are a number of ayat in the Qur’an which identify
the sources of Shari’ah  and the order of priority between them. But one passage in which all the
principal sources are indicated occurs in Sura al-Nisa' (4: 58-59) which is as follows: 'O you believers!
Obey God and obey the Messenger and those of you who are in charge of affairs. If you have a dispute
concerning any matter, refer it to God and to the Messenger,' 'Obey God' in this ayah  refers to the
Qur’an, and 'Obey the Messenger' refers to the Sunnah . Obedience to 'those who are in charge of affairs'
is held to be a reference to ijma' , and the last portion of the ayah  which requires the referral of disputes
to God and to the Messenger authorises qiyas . For qiyas  is essentially an extension of the injunctions of
the Qur’an and Sunnah . The rationale or the effective cause of qiyas  may be clearly indicated in these
sources or it may be identified by way of inference ( istinbat ). In either case, qiyas  essentially consists of
the discovery of a hukm  which is already indicated in the divine sources. [Cf. Badran, Usul , pp. 51-52.]Some fuqaha'  have drawn a distinction between dalil and amarah  (lit. sign or allusion) and apply dalil
to the kind of evidence which leads to a definitive ruling or that which leads to positive knowledge
('ilm). Amarah  on the other hand is reserved for evidence or indication which only leads to a speculative

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 20ruling. [Amidi, Ihkam , I, 9.] In this way, the term 'dalil'  would only apply to the definitive proofs, namely the
Qur’an, Sunnah  and ijma' , and the remaining proofs which comprise a measure of speculation, such as
qiyas  and istihsan , etc., would fall under the category of amarat .
The proofs of Shari'ah  have been further divided into transmitted proofs ( adillah naqliyyah ) and
rational proofs ( adillah 'aqliyyah ). The authority of the transmitted proofs is independent of their
conformity or otherwise with the dictates of reason, although as we shall later elaborate, most of the
transmitted proofs can also be rationally justified. However, the authority and the binding force of the
Qur’an, Sunnah  and ijma'  are independent of any rational justification that might exist in their favour.
To these are added two other transmitted proofs, namely the ruling of the Companions, and the laws
revealed prior to the advent of Islam ( shara'i man qablana ) [Cf. Badran, Usul , PP. 54-55.]The rational proofs are, on the other hand, founded in reason and need to be rationally justified. They
can only be accepted by virtue of their rationality. Qiyas , istihsan , istislah  and istishab  are basically all
rationalist doctrines although they are in many ways dependent on the transmitted proofs. Rationality
alone is not an independent proof in Islam, which is why the rational proofs cannot be totally separated
from the transmitted proofs. Qiyas , for example, is a rational proof, but it also partakes in the
transmitted proofs to the extent that qiyas  in order to be valid must be founded on an established hukm
of the Qur’an, Sunnah  or ijma' . However the issue to which qiyas  is applied (i.e. the far') must have a
'illah  in common with the original hukm . To establish the commonality of the 'illah  in qiyas  is largely a
matter of opinion and ijtihad . Qiyas  is therefore classified under the category of adillah aqliyyah .
As noted above, the adillah  Shar’iyyah  are on the whole in harmony with reason. This will be clear
from the fact that the Shari’ah  in all of its parts is addressed to the mukallaf , that is, the competent
person who is in possession of his faculty of reasoning. The Shari’ah  as a whole does not impose any
obligation that would contradict the requirements of 'aql. Since the criterion of obligation ( taklif ) is 'aql,
and without it all legal obligations fall to the ground, it would follow that a hukm shar'i  which is
abhorrent to 'aql is of no consequence. [Amidi, Ihkam , III, 180; Badran, Usul , P. 50]The adillah Shar’iyyah  have been further classified into mustaqill  and muqayyad , that is independent
and dependent proofs respectively. The first three sources of the Shari'ah  are each an independent asl,
or dalil mustaqill , that is, a proof in its own right. Qiyas  on the other hand is an asl or dalil muqayyad  in
the sense, as indicated above, that its authority is derived from one or the other of the three independent
sources. The question may arise as to why ijma’  has been classified as an independent proof despite the
fact that it is often in need of a basis ( sanad ) in the Qur'an or the Sunnah . The answer to this is that
ijma’  is in need of a sanad  in the divine sources for its formulation in the first place. However, once the
ijma’  is concluded, it is no longer dependent on its sanad  and it becomes an independent proof. Unlike
qiyas , which continues to be in need of justification in the form of a 'illah , a conclusive ijma'  is not in
need of justification and is therefore an independent asl. [Amidi, Ihkam , I, 260.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 21The only other classification or adillah  which needs to be mentioned is their division into definitive
(qat’i ) and speculative ( zanni ) proofs. This division of dalil shar'i  contemplates the proofs of Shari'ah
not only in their entirety but also in respect of the detailed rules which they contain. In, this way, the
Qur’an, Sunnah  and ijma'  are definitive proofs in the sense that they are decisive and binding. However
each of these sources contains speculative rules which are open to interpretation. A dalil in this sense is
synonymous with hukm . A Dalil  may be qat’i  in regards to both transmission ( riwayah ) and meaning
(dalalah ). The clear injunctions of the Qur’an and Hadith  Mutawatir  are all qat’i  in respect of both
transmission and meaning. We shall have occasion later to elaborate on this subject in the context of the
characteristic features of Qur’anic legislation. Suffice it here to say that the Qur’an is authentic in all of
its parts, and therefore of proven authenticity ( qat’i al-thubut ). The solitary, or ahad , Hadith on the
other hand is of speculative authenticity and therefore falls under the category of speculative proofs.[Shawkani, Irshad , p. 47; Badran, Usul , p. 53; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 305.] Similarly, a ruling of ijma’  may have reached us by
continuous testimony ( tawatur ) in which case it would be definitely proven ( qat’i al-thubut ). But when
ijma’  is transmitted through solitary reports, its authenticity would be open to doubt and therefore zanni
al-thubut .
The text of the Qur’an or the Hadith may convey a command or a prohibition. According to the general
rule, a command ( amr) conveys obligation ( wujub ), and prohibition ( nahy ) conveys tahrim  unless there
is evidence to suggest otherwise. It is in the light of the wording of the text, its subject-matter and other
supportive evidence that the precise shar’i  value of a textual ruling can be determined. A command
may thus imply a recommendation ( nadb ) or a mere permissibility ( ibahah ) and not wujub . Likewise a
prohibition ( nahy ) in the Qur’an or the Sunnah  may be held to imply abomination ( karahah ) and not
necessarily tahrim . Consequently, when the precise value of the qat’i  and the zanni  on the scale of five
values is not self-evident, it is determined by supportive evidence that may be available in the sources
or by ijtihad . The qat’i  of the Qur’an and Sunnah  is basically not open to interpretation. The scope of
interpretation and ijtihad  is consequently confined to the zanni  proofs alone. [Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 35, Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.
711; Shaltut, Al-IsIam , p. 498.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 22Chapter Two: The First Source of Shari'ah : The Qur'anBeing the verbal noun of the root word qara'a  (to read), 'Qur’an' literally means 'reading' or 'recitation'.
It may be defined as 'the book containing the speech of God revealed to the Prophet Muhammad in
Arabic and transmitted to us by continuous testimony, or tawatur' . [The Qur’an also calls itself by alternative names, such as
kitab , huda , furqan , and dhikr  (book, guide, distinguisher, and remembrance respectively). When the definite article, al, is prefixed to the Qur’an, it refers to the
whole of the Book; but without this prefix, the Qur’an can mean either the whole or a part of the Book. Thus one may refer to a singular sura or ayah  thereof as the
Qur’an, but not as al-Qur'an.] It is a proof of the prophecy of Muhammad, the most authoritative guide for
Muslims, and the first source of the Shari’ah . The ulema are unanimous on this, and some even say that
it is the only source and that all other sources are explanatory to the Qur’an. The revelation of the
Qur’an began with the Sura al-'Alaq (96:1) starting with the words 'Read in the name of your Lord' and
ending with the ayah  in sura al-Ma’idah (5:3): 'Today I have perfected your religion for you and
completed my favour toward you, and chosen Islam as your religion. [Some disagree on this point, saying that the last ayah
of the Qur’an was al-Baqarah 2: 281 as follows: 'Fear the day when you will be brought back to God; then every soul will be paid in full according to whatever it
has earned, and they will not be treated unjustly.'] Learning and religious guidance, being the first and the last themes of
the Qur’anic revelation, are thus the favour of God upon mankind.
There are 114 suras and 6235 ayat of unequal length in the Qur’an. The shortest of the suras consist of
four and the longest of 286 ayat. Each chapter has a separate title. The longest suras appear first and the
suras become shorter as the text proceeds. Both the order of the ayat within each sura, and the sequence
of the suras, were re-arranged and finally determined by the Prophet in the year of his demise.
According to this arrangement, the Qur’an begins with sura al-Fatihah and ends with sura al-Nas. [Hughes,
Dictionary , P. 485ff; von Denffer, ‘ Ulum , p. 68ff.]The contents of the Qur’an are not classified subject-wise. The ayat on various topics appear in
unexpected places, and no particular order can be ascertained in the sequence of its text. To give just a
few examples, the command concerning salah  appears in the second sura, in the midst o other ayat
which relate to the subject of divorce (al-Baqarah, 2:228-248). In the same sura, we find rules which
relate to wine-drinking and war, followed by passages concerning the treatment of orphans and the
marriage of unbelieving women (al-Baqarah, 216-211) Similarly the ayat relating to the pilgrimage of
hajj occur both in sura al-Baqarah (196-2O3) and sura al-Hajj (22:26-27). Rules on marriage divorce
and revocation ( rij'ah ) are found in the suras al-Baqarah, al-Talaq, and al-Nisa. From this a conclusion
has been drawn that the Qur’an is an indivisible whole and a guide for belief and action which must be
accepted and followed in its entirety. Hence any attempt to follow some parts or the Qur'an and
abandon others will be totally invalid. This is in fact the purport of the Qur’anic text (al-Ma’idah, 5: 52)
where the Prophet has been warned: 'Beware of them (i.e. the disbeliever’s) lest they seduce you away
from a part of that which God has sent down to you. [Shaltut, Al-Islam , PP. 499-500; Qattan, Tashri’ , p. 83; Badran, Usul , P. 72.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 23The Qur’an consists of manifest revelation ( wahy zahir ), which is defined as communication from God
to the Prophet Muhammad, conveyed by the angel Gabriel, in the very words of God. Manifest
revelation differs from internal revelation ( wahy batin ) in that the latter consists of the inspiration
(ilham ) of concepts only: God inspired the Prophet and the latter conveyed the concepts in his own
words. All the sayings, or ahadith , of the Prophets fall under the category of internal revelation, and as
such they are not included in the Qur’an. A brief word may be added here concerning Hadith Qudsi . In
this variety of Hadith, the Prophet narrates a concept directly from God. Hadith  Qudsi  differs from the
other varieties of Hadith in form only. The Prophet himself has not distinguished Hadith  Qudsi  from
other ahadith : it was in fact introduced as a separate category by the ulema of Hadith at around the fifth
century Hijrah. Hadith in all of its varieties consists of divine inspiration which is communicated in the
words of the Prophet. No Hadith may be ranked on equal footing with the Qur’an. The salah  cannot be
performed by reciting the Hadith, nor is the recitation of Hadith considered as of the same spiritual
merit as the Qur'an. [Khallaf, ‘ Ilm, P. 23; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 69; Abu Zahrah, Usul , P. 59.]The Qur’an explicitly states that it is all communicated in pure and clear Arabic (al-Nahl, 16:3o).
Although the ulema are in agreement that words of non-Arabic origin occur in the Qur'an, they are,
nevertheless, words which were admitted and integrated into the language of the Arabs before the
revelation of the Qur’an. To give just a few examples, words such as qistas  (scales - occurring in the
Sura al-Isra', 17:35), ghassaq  (intense cold) in Sura al-Naba' (78:2 5) and sijjil (baked clay - in al-Hijr,
15:74) are of Greek, Turkish and Persian origins respectively. [For an exclusive treatment of words of foreign origin in the
Qur'an see Shawkani, Irshad , p. 22ff. See also Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 68.] But this usage is confined to odd words; a phrase or a
sentence of non-Arabic origin does not occur in the Qur’an. [Shaltut, Al-Islam , P. 486; von Denffer, ' Ulum , P. 73.] Since
the Qur’an consists of manifest revelation in Arabic, a translation of the Qur’an into another language,
or its commentary whether in Arabic or other languages, are not a part of the Qur’an. However, Imam
Abu Hanifah has held the view that the Qur’an is the name for a meaning only, and as such, salah  may
be performed in its Persian translation. But the disciples of Abu Hanifah have disagreed with this view
and it is reported that Abu Hanifah himself reversed his initial ruling, and this is now considered to be
the correct view of the Hanafi school. [This report is attributed to a Nuh b. Maryam who has confirmed that Abu Hanifah changed his initial
ruling. See Aba Zahrah, Usul , p. 60; Shaltut, Al-Islam , P. 478; Sabuni, Madkhal , P. 4.]The Prophet himself memorised the Qur’an, and so did his Companions. This was, to a large extent,
facilitated by the fact that the Qur’an was revealed piecemeal over a period of twenty-three years in
relation to particular events. The Qur’an itself explains the rationale of graduality ( tanjim ) in its
revelation as follows: 'The unbelievers say, why has not the Qur’an been sent down to him
[Muhammad] all at once. Thus [it is revealed] that your hearts may be strengthened, and We rehearse it
to you gradually, and well-arranged' [al-Furqan, 23:32].

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 24Elsewhere we read in the text: 'It is a Qur’an We have divided into parts in order that you may recite it
to people at intervals: We have revealed it by stages' (Bani Isra'il, 17:106). In yet another passage,
Almighty God addresses the Prophet: 'By degrees shall We teach you to declare [the message] so that
you do not forget' (al-A'la, 87:6).
Graduality in the revelation of Qur’an afforded the believers the opportunity to reflect over it and to
retain it in their memories. Revelation over a period of time also facilitated continuous contact and
renewal of spiritual strength so that the hostility of the unbelievers toward the new faith did not weaken
the hearts of the Muslims. Furthermore, in view of the widespread illiteracy of the Arabs at the time,
had the Qur’an been revealed all at once, they would have found it difficult to understand. The Qur’anic
legislation concerning matters which touched the lives of the people was therefore not imposed all at
once. It was revealed piecemeal so as to avoid hardship to the believers. [Sabuni, Madkhal , PP. 41-42.; Abu Zahrah, Usul,
p. 61; Qattan, Tashri’,  P. 57ff.] The ban on the consumption of alcohol affords an interesting example of the
Qur’anic method of graduality in legislation, and throws light on the attitude of the Qur’an to the nature
and function of legislation itself. Consumption of alcohol was apparently, subject to no restriction in the
early years. Later, the following Qur’anic passage was revealed in the form of a moral advice: 'They ask
you about alcohol and gambling, say: in these there is great harm and also benefit for the people, but
their harm far outweighs their benefit' (al-Baqarah; 2:219). Then offering prayers while under the
influence of alcohol was prohibited (al-Nisa', 4:43). Finally a total ban on wine drinking was imposed
(al-Ma’idah, 5:93) and both alcohol and gambling were declared to be 'works of the devil ... the devil
wants to sow enmity and rancour among you'. This shows the gradual tackling of problems as and when
they arose.
The ulema are in agreement to the effect that the entire text of the Qur’an is Mutawatir , that is, its
authenticity is proven by universally accepted testimony. It has been retained both in memory and in
written record throughout the generations. Hence nothing less that tawatur  is accepted in evidence to
establish the authenticity of the variant readings of the Qur’an. Thus the variant reading of some words
in a few ayat, attributed to 'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud, for example, which is not established by tawatur  is
not a part of the Qur’an. In the context of penance ( kaffarah ) of a false oath, for example, the standard
text provides this to be three days of fasting. But Ibn Mas'ud's version has it as three consecutive days
of fasting. Since the additional element (i.e. consecutive) in the relevant ayah in sura al-Ma’idah (5:92)
is not established by tawatur , it is not a part of the Qur’an and is therefore of no effect. [Ghazali, Mustafa,  I. 64;
Shawkani, Irshad , P. 30; Shaltut, Al-Islam , P. 440; The same would apply to the two other instances of variant readings which are attributed to ‘Abdullah ibn
Mas’ud concerning the punishment of theft, and the form of divorce known as ila in sura al-Ma'idah (5: 38) and al-Baqarah (2: 226) respectively. Since these are
only supported by solitary reports ( Ahad ) they do not constitute a part of the Qur’an.]During the lifetime of the Prophet, the text of the Qur’an was preserved not only in memories, but also
in inscriptions on such available materials as flat stones, wood and bones, which would explain why it
could not have been compiled in a bound volume. Initially the first Caliph, Abu Bakr, collected the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 25Qur'an soon after the battle of Yamamah which led to the death of at least seventy of the memorisers of
the Qur'an. Zayd b. Thabit, the scribe of the Prophet, was employed on the task of compiling the text
which he accomplished between 11 and 14 Hijrah. But several versions and readings of this edition
soon crept into use. Hence the third Caliph, 'Uthman, once again utilised the services of Zayd to verify
the accuracy of the text and compiled it in a single Volume. All the remaining variations were then
destroyed. As a result only one authentic text has remained in use to this day. [Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 62; A bdur Rahim,
Jurisprudence , P. 71.]The Qur’an was revealed in two distinct periods of the Prophet's mission in Mecca and Madinah
respectively. The larger part of the Qur’an, that is nineteen out of the total of thirty parts, was received
during the first twelve and a half years of the Prophet's residence in Mecca. The remainder of the Qur'an
was received after the Prophet's migration to Madinah over a period of just over nine and a half years.[To be precise, the Meccan period lasted twelve years, five months and thirteen days, and the Madinan period, nine years, seven months and seven days.] The
Meccan part or the Qur'an is mainly devoted to matters of belief, the Oneness of God ( Tawhid ), the
necessity of the prophethood of Muhammad, the hereafter, disputation with the unbelievers and their
invitation to Islam. But the Madinese part of the Qur’an also comprised legal rules and regulated the
various aspects of life in the new environment of Madinah. Since the Madinese period signified the
formation of the ummah  and of the nascent Islamic state, the Qur’anic emphasis was shifted to
principles regulating the political, legal, social and economic life of the new community. During this
period Islam expanded to other parts of Arabia, and the Qur’anic response to the need for rules to
regulate matters of war and peace, the status and rights of the conquered people as well as the
organisation of the family and principles of government feature prominently in the Madinese part of the
Qur’an. [Cf. Sabuni, Madkhal , PP. 4 1-44; Khallaf, ‘ Ilm, P. 24.] The knowledge of the Meccan and the Madinese contents of
the Qur’an gives one an insight into the context and circumstances in which the ayat were revealed; it is
particularly relevant to the understanding of the incidence of abrogation ( naskh ) in the Qur’an. To
distinguish the abrogating ( al-nasikh ) from the abrogated ( al-mansukh ) portions of the text depends on
determining the chronological order in the revelation of the relevant ayat. Similarly, most of the general
(Amm ) rulings of the text have been qualified either by the text itself or by the Hadith. Thus the
knowledge of the Makki and Madani parts of the revelation facilitates a better understanding of some of
the characteristic features of the Qur’anic legislation.
A sura is considered to be Makki if its revelation had begun in Mecca, even if it contained ayat that
were later revealed in Madinah. The Qur’an consists of eighty-five Meccan and twenty-nine Madinan
suras. The differences of content and style that are observed in each are reflective of the prevailing
circumstances of each period. Since Muslims were in the minority in Mecca the Meccan ayat may thus
be especially meaningful to Muslims living in a dominantly un-Islamic environment, whereas the
Madinese ayat may take for granted the presence of the sovereign authority of the Islamic state. The
Meccan suras are generally short but rhythmical and intense in their emotional appeal to the pagan

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 26Arabs, whereas the Madinan suras are detailed and convey a sense of serenity that marks a difference of
style in the revelation of the Qur’an. [Cf. von Denffer, ‘ Ulum , p. 90.]The distinction between the Meccan and Madinan parts of the Qur’an is based on the information that is
provided mainly by the Companions and the following generation of the 'successors': the Prophet
himself has said nothing on the subject. The distinction is also facilitated considerably by internal
evidence in the Qur’an, such as the theme itself: ayat about warfare were, for example, revealed only
after the Hijrah, but references to Abu Lahab in sura 111 and to the battle of Badr (3: 123) indicate the
Meccan origin of the suras in which they occur. Similarly the form of address is often different in the
two parts. The frequent address, 'O you who believe' and 'O people of the Book' indicates a Madinan
origin, while 'O people' or 'O mankind' are typically Meccan. There are nineteen suras in the Qur’an
which begin with abbreviated letters (al-muqatta'at ); all of them are known to be Meccan except two,
namely al-Baqarah, and Al-Imran. All references to the munafiqun  (hyprocrites) are Madinan and all
suras that contain sajdah , that is, an order to prostrate, are Meccan. The distinction between the Makki
and Madinese portions of the text is on the whole a well-established feature of the Qur’an, which is
normally indicated next to the title of each sura, and the best evidence of such distinction is internal
evidence in the Qur’an itself. [Cf. von Denffer, ‘ Ulum , p. 91.]With regard to distinguishing the Makki from the Madani contents of the Qur’an, the ulema have
applied three different criteria: 1) The time of the revelation, meaning that the part of the Qur’an which
was revealed prior to the Prophet’s migration to Madinah is classified as Makki and the remaining part
which was revealed after the occasion is identified as Madani regardless of the locality in which they
were received. In this way the ayat which were actually revealed in Mecca after the Year of Victory
(‘am al-fath ) or during the Farewell Pilgrimage ( hajjah al-wida ) are accounted as Madani. This is
considered to be the most preferred of the three methods under discussion. 2) The place of revelation,
which means that all the ayat that were revealed while the Prophet was in Mecca, or its neighbouring
areas, are classified as Makki, and ayat that were actually revealed in Madinah or its surrounding areas
are classified as Madani. This criterion is, however, not conclusive in that it leaves out the ayat which
were received while the Prophet was travelling to places such as Jerusalem or Tabuk. 3) The nature of
the audience, which means that all the parts of the Qur’an which are addressed to the people of Makkah
are classified as Makki and those which are addressed to the people of Madinah are classified as
Madani. In this way all passages which begin with phrases such as 'O mankind' or ‘O people' are Makki
and those which open with phrases, such as 'O believers' are typically Madarni. [Cf. Qattan, Tashri’ , 69-70.]In the sense that legal material occupies only a small portion of the bulk of its text, the Qur’an is not a
legal or a constitutional document. The Qur’an calls itself huda , or guidance, not a code of law. Out of
over 6,200 ayat, less than one-tenth relate to law and Jurisprudence, while the remainder are largely
concerned with matters of belief and morality, the five pillars of the faith and a variety of other themes.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 27Its ideas of economic and social justice, including its legal Contents, are on the whole Subsidiary to its
religious call.
The legal or practical contents of the Qur’an ( al-ahkam al-‘amaliyyah ) constitute the basis of what is
known as fiqh al-Qur’an , or the Juris  corpus  of the Qur’an. There are close to 350 legal ayat in the
Qur’an, most of which were revealed in response to problems that were encountered. Some were
revealed with the aim of repealing objectionable customs such as infanticide, usury, gambling and
unlimited polygamy. Others laid down penalties with which to enforce the reforms that the Qur’an had
introduced. But on the whole, the Qur’an confirmed and upheld the existing customs and institutions of
Arab society and only introduced changes that were deemed necessary. [Cf. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , P. 71.]There are an estimated 140 ayat in the Qur’an on devotional matters such as salah , legal alms ( zakah ),
siyam  (fasting), the Pilgrimage of hajj, jihad , charities, the taking of oaths and penances ( kaffarat ).
Another seventy ayat are devoted to marriage, divorce, the waiting period of 'iddah , revocation ( rij'ah ),
dower, maintenance, custody of children, fosterage, paternity, inheritance and bequest. Rules
concerning commercial transactions ( mu'amalat ) such as sale, lease, loan and mortgage, constitute the
subject of another seventy ayat. There are about thirty ayat on crimes and penalties such as murder,
highway robbery ( hirabah ), adultery and false accusation ( qadhf ). Another thirty ayat speak of justice,
equality, evidence, consultation, and the rights and obligations of citizens. There are about ten ayat
relating to economic matters regulating relations between the poor and the rich, workers' rights and so
on. [Shaltut, Al-Islam , P. 494; Khallaf ‘ Ilm, P32-33.] It will be noted, however, that the fuqaha  are not in agreement over
these figures, as calculations of this nature tend to differ according to one's understanding of, and
approach to, the contents of the Qur’an. [Note, for example, Ghazali, who estimates the ayat al-ahkam  at 500. While commenting on
Ghazali's estimate, Shawkani on the other hand observes that any such calculation can only amount to a rough estimate ( Mustasfa , II, 101, and Shawkani, Irshad , p.
250)]Characteristics of Qur’anic LegislationWe have already described the phenomenon of graduality ( tanjim ) in Qur’anic legislation, its division
into Makki and Madani, and also the fact that the Qur’an has been revealed entirely in pure Arabic. In
the discussion below, I have also included ratiocination ( ta'lil) among the characteristic features of
Qur’anic legislation despite the fact that the Qur’an specifies the effective cause or the rationale of only
some of its laws. The Qur’an is nevertheless quite expressive of the purpose, reason, objective, benefit,
reward and advantage of its injunctions. Since the Qur’an addresses the conscience of the individual
with a view to persuading and convincing him of the truth and divine origin of its message, it is often
combined with an allusion to the benefit that may accrue by the observance of its commands or the
harm that is prevented by its prohibitions. This is a feature of the Qur'anic legislation which is closely

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 28associated with ratiocination ( ta'lil) and provides the mujtahid  with a basis on which to conduct further
enquiry into ta'lil. However, of all the characteristic features of Qur’anic legislation, its division into
qat’i  and zanni  is perhaps the most significant and far-reaching, as it relates to almost any aspect of
enquiry into the Qur'anic legislation. I shall therefore take up this subject first.I. The Definitive ( qat’i ) and the Speculative ( zanni )A ruling of the Qur’an may be conveyed in a text which is either unequivocal and clear, or in language
that is open to different interpretations. A definitive text is one which is clear and specific; it has only
one meaning and admits of no other interpretations. An example of this is the text on the entitlement of
the husband in the estate of his deceased wife, as follows: 'In what your wives leave, your share is a
half, if they leave no child" (al-Nisa', 4:12). Other examples are 'The adulterer, whether a man or a
woman, flog them each a hundred stripes' (al-Baqarah, 2:196), and those who accuse chaste women of
adultery and fail to bring four witnesses [to prove it], flog them eighty stripes' (al-Nur, 24:4). The
quantitative aspects of these rulings, namely one half, one hundred, and eighty are self-evident and
therefore not open to interpretation. The rulings of the Qur’an on the essentials of the faith such as
salah  and fasting, the specified shares in inheritance and the prescribed penalties, are all qat’i  their
validity may not be disputed by anyone, everyone is bound to follow them, and they are not open to
ijtihad .
The speculative ayat of the Qur’an are, on the other hand, open to interpretation and ijtihad . The best
interpretation is that which can be obtained from the Qur’an itself, that is, by looking at the Qur’an as a
whole and finding the necessary elaboration elsewhere in a similar or even a different context. The
Sunnah  is another source which supplements the Qur’an and interprets its rulings. When the necessary
interpretation can be found in an authentic Hadith, it becomes an integral part of the Qur’an and both
together carry a binding force. Next in this order comes the Companions who are particularly well-
qualified to interpret the Qur'an in light of their close familiarity with its text, the surrounding
circumstances, and the teachings of the Prophet. [Khallaf, ‘Ilm, P. 35; Abu Zahrah, Usul , P. 71]An example of the zanni  in the Qur’an is the text which reads, 'Prohibited to you are your mothers and
your daughters' (al-Nisa 4:23). The text is definitive in regard to the prohibition of marriage with one’s
mother and daughter and there is no disagreement on this point. However, the word banatukum  ('your
daughters') could be taken for its literal meaning, which would be a female child born to a person either
through marriage or through zina, or for its juridical meaning. In the latter sense 'banatukum'  can only
mean a legitimate daughter.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 29The jurists are in disagreement as to which of these meanings should be read into the text. The Hanafis
have upheld the first of the two meanings and have ruled on the prohibition of marriage to one's
illegitimate daughter, whereas the Shafi'is have upheld the second. According to this interpretation,
marriage with one's illegitimate daughter is not forbidden as the text only refers to a daughter through
marriage. It would follow from this that the illegitimate daughter has no right to inheritance, and the
rules of guardianship and custody would not apply to her. [Sha’ban,'Manhaj', P. 31]In a similar vein, the ulema have differed on the definition of futile, as opposed to deliberate, oaths,
which occur in sura al-Ma’idah (5:92): 'God will not call you to account for what is futile ( al-laghw ) in
your oaths, but He will call you to account for your deliberate oaths . . .' The text then continues to spell
out the expiation, or kaffarah , for deliberate oaths, which consists of either feeding ten hungry persons
who are in need, or setting a slave free, or fasting for three days. According to the Hanafis, a futile oath
is one which is taken on the truth of something that is suspected to be true but the opposite emerges to
be the case. The majority have, on the other hand, held it to mean taking an oath which is not intended,
that is, when taken in jest without any intention. Similar differences have arisen concerning the precise
definition of what may be considered as a deliberate oath ( yamin al-mu'aqqadah ). [A typical form of a sinful oath is
when a person takes an oath on the truth of something which he knows to be untrue; this is called yamin al-ghamus , which is a variety of yamin al-mu'aqqadah .
However the Hanafis maintain that the latter only refers to the situation where a person pledges to do something in the future but then refuses to fulfill it. He is then
liable to pay the kaffarah .] There is also disagreement as to whether the three days of fasting should be
consecutive or could be three separate days. Hence the text of this ayah , although definitive on the basic
requirement of kaffarah  for futile oaths, is speculative as to the precise terms of the kaffarah  and the
manner of its implementation.
To give another example of zanni  in the Qur’an, we may refer to the phrase yunfaw min al-ard  ('to be
banished from the earth') which occurs in sura al-Ma’idah (5:33). The phrase spells out the penalty for
highway robbery ( hirabah ), or according to an alternative but similar interpretation, for waging war on
the community and its legitimate leadership. Banishment ( nafy) in this ayah  can mean exile from the
place the offence is committed in the first place. This is, in fact, the obvious meaning of the phrase, and
the one which has been adopted by the majority of the ulema. But the Hanafi jurists maintain that the
phrase means imprisonment, not exile. According to the Hanafis, a literal approach to the interpretation
of this phrase does not prove to be satisfactory: if one is to be literal, then how can one be banished
from the face of the earth by any method but death? Nafy , or exile, on the other hand, is a penalty other
than killing. Furthermore, if the offender is to be banished from one place to another within the Muslim
territories, the harm is not likely to be prevented as he may commit further offences. The Hanafis have
further argued that banishing a Muslim outside the territory of Islam is not legally permissible. The only
proper meaning of the phrase which would achieve the Shari’ah  purpose behind the penalty, is,
therefore, imprisonment.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 30And lastly, the whole ayah  of muharabah  in which the phrase yunfaw min al-ard  occurs is open to
divergent interpretations. The ayah  in question reads:
The punishment of those who wage war against God and His
Messenger and strive to make mischief in the land is that they should
be killed or crucified or their hands and their feet should be cut off on
opposite sides, or they should be banished from the earth.
In this passage, confusion arises from the combination of phrases which contain differential penalties
for hirabah . This is mainly due to the use of the article aw, meaning 'and' between the three phrases
which provide three different penalties for the offence in question. It is thus not known for certain as to
which of the three penalties are to be applied to the offender, that is, the muharib . The majority view is
that the muharib  is liable to execution when he actually robs and kills his victim, but if he only robs
him, the offender is liable to the mutilation of hands. And finally, if there be no killing involved and no
robbery, then the penalty is banishment. In the more intensified cases where the offender kills and robs
his victim, the former is to be killed and crucified. According to an alternative juristic opinion, it is for
the ruler to determine one or the other, or a combination of these penalties, in individual cases.
A Qur’anic injunction may simultaneously possess a definitive and a speculative meaning, in which
case each of the two meanings will convey a ruling independently of the other. An example of this is
the injunction concerning the requirement of ablution for prayers which reads in part ' . . . and wipe
your heads' (al-Ma’idah, 5:6). This text is definitive on the requirement of wiping ( mash ) of the head in
wudu' , but since it does not specify the precise area of the head to be wiped, it is speculative in regard to
this point. Hence we find that the jurists are unanimous in regard to the first, but have differed in regard
to the second aspect of this injunction. [Badran, Usul , p. 66.]There are sometime instances where the scope of disagreement over the interpretation of the Qur’an is
fairly extensive. Mahmud Shaltut, for example, underlines this point by noting that at times seven or
eight different juristic conclusions have been arrived at on one and the same issue. And he goes on to
say that not all of these views can be said to be part of the religion, nor could they be legally binding.
These are ijtihadi  opinions; ijtihad  is not only permissible but is encouraged. For the Shari’ah  does not
restrict the liberty of the individual to investigate and express an opinion. They may be right or they
may be wrong, and in either case, the diversity of opinion offers the political authority a range of choice
from which to select the view it deems to be most beneficial to the community. When the ruler
authorises a particular interpretation of the Qur’an and enacts it into law, it becomes obligatory for
everyone to follow only the authorised version . [Shaltut, Al-Islam , P. 498.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 31The ulema are in agreement that the specific ( Khass ) of the Qur’an (and of Sunnah ) is definitive, but
they are in disagreement as to whether the general ( 'Amm ) is definitive or speculative. The Hanafis
maintain that the ‘ Amm  is definitive and binding: but the Malikis, Shafi’is and Hanbalis hold that the
‘Amm  by itself is speculative and open to qualification and specification. We need not, at this point, go
into the details of the ‘ Amm  and the Khass  as we shall have occasion to return to this subject later.
Suffice it here to explain how the ‘ Amm  and khass  may be related to qat’i'  and zanni .
First we may highlight the zanni  content of the 'Amm  by referring to the Qur’anic ruling which
provides: 'Forbidden to you (in marriage) are your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your father's
sisters and your mother's sisters' (al-Nisa', 4:23). This is a general ruling in that mothers, daughters,
sisters, etc. are all 'Amm  as they include, in the case of ‘mother’ not only the real mother but also the
step-mother and even the grandmother. Similarly, ‘daughters’ can include real daughters, stepdaughters,
granddaughters and even illegitimate daughters. The application of these terms to all of their various
meanings is qat’i  according to the Hanafis, but is zanni  according to the majority of ulema. Whenever
the zanni  of the Qur’an is explained and clarified by the Qur’an itself or by the Sunnah , it may become
qat’i' , in which case the clarification becomes an integral part of the original ruling. On the subject of
prohibited degrees in marriage, there is ample evidence both in the Qur’an and the Sunnah  to specify
and elaborate the 'Amm  of the Qur’an on this subject. Similarly, when the Qur’an or the Sunnah
specifies a general ruling of the Qur’an, the part which is so specified becomes qat’i' .
To give another example of the ‘ Amm  which can be clearly seen in its capacity as zanni  we refer to the
Qur’anic proclamation that 'God has permitted sale but prohibited usury' (al-Baqarah, 2:275). This is a
general ruling in the sense that sale, that is any sale, is made lawful. But there are certain varieties of
sale which are specifically forbidden by the Sunnah . Consequently, the ‘ Amm  of this ayah  is specified
by the Sunnah  to the extent that some varieties of sale, such as sale of unripened fruit on a tree, were
forbidden and therefore excluded from the scope of this ayah . The ulema are all in agreement to the
effect that once the ‘ Amm  has been specified even in a narrow and limited sense, the part which still
remains unspecified is reduced to zanni  and will be treated as such.
Broadly speaking, the Khass  is definitive. When, for example, the Qur’an (al-Nur, 24:4) prescribes the
punishment of eighty lashes for slanderous accusation ( qadhf ), the quantitative aspect of this
punishment is specific ( Khass ) and not susceptible to any speculation. But then we find that the same
passage (al-Nur, 24:4) prescribes a supplementary penalty for the slanderous accuser ( qadhif ) where it
reads: 'Never accept their testimony, for they are evildoers ( fasiqun ), except for those who repent
afterwards and make amends.' This text is clear and definitive on the point that the qadhif  is to be
disqualified as a witness, but then an element of doubt is introduced by the latter portion of the text
which tends to render ambiguous the precise scope of its application. Having enacted both the principal
and the supplementary penalties for slanderous accusers and fasiqun  it becomes questionable whether
the qadhif  should qualify as a witness after repentance. Does the text under discussion mean that the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 32concession is only to be extended to the fasiqun  and not necessarily to slanderous accusers? If the
answer is in the affirmative, then once the qadhif is convicted of the offence, no amount of repentance
will qualify him as an upright witness again. The whole confusion is due to uncertainty in the meaning
of a pronoun, namely al-ladhina  (i.e. 'those') which is not known to refer to all or only part of the
preceding elements in the text. The Hanafis disqualify the qadhif  permanently from being a witness,
whereas the Shafi’is would admit him as a witness after repentance. This example also serves to show
that it is not always self-evident whether a text is qat’i’  or zanni  as this too may be open to
interpretation. But the main point of citing this example is to show that although the Khass  is qat’i’ , an
aspect thereof may be zanni  in a way that might affect the definitive character of the Khass  as a whole.
Although in principle the Khass  is qat’i’  and, as such, is not open to speculative interpretation, there
may be exceptions to this general rule. For example, the penance ( kaffarah ) of a false oath according to
a textual ruling of the Qur’an (al-Ma’idah, 5:92) is of three types, one of which is to feed ten poor
persons. This is a specific ruling in the sense that 'ten poor persons' has only one meaning. But even so,
the Hanafis have given this text an alternative interpretation, which is that instead of feeding ten poor
persons, one such person may be fed ten times. The majority of ulema, however, do not agree with the
Hanafis on this point. Be that as it may, this example will serve to show that the scope of ijtihad  is not
always confined to the 'Amm  but that even the Khass  and definitive rulings may require elaboration
which might be based on speculative reasoning.
Furthermore, the Khass  of the Qur’an normally occurs in the form of a command or a prohibition
which, as discussed below in a separate chapter, can either be qat’i’  or zanni . The zanni  component of a
command or a prohibition is readily identified by the fact that a command in the Qur’an may amount
either to wajib  or to mandub  or even to a mere mubah . Similarly, it is not always certain whether a
prohibition in the Qur’an amounts to a total ban ( tahrim ) or to a mere abomination ( karahah ).
The absolute ( Mutlaq ) and the qualified ( Muqayyad ) are also classified as the sub-varieties of Khass .
But these too can be related to the qat’i’ zanni  division in at least two ways. Firstly, that somewhat like
the ‘Amm , the absolute is speculative in regard to the precise scope of its application. Secondly, the
qualification of the absolute, the grounds on which it is qualified and the nature of the relationship
between the qualified and the qualifier are not always a matter of certain knowledge. The absolute in
the Qur’an is sometimes qualified on speculative grounds, which is why the jurists are not in agreement
over the various aspects of qualifying the Mutlaq . Further detail on the subject of Mutlaq  and
Muqayyad  and juristic disagreements over its various aspects can be found in a separate chapter below.
Suffice it here to give an illustration: there are two separate rulings on the subject of witnesses in the
Qur’an, one of which is absolute and the other qualified in regard to the attributes of the witness. First it
is provided with regard to the transaction of sale to 'bring witnesses when you conclude a sale - wa-
shhidu idha tabaya tum'  (al-Baqarah, 2:282). In this ayah , the witness is not qualified in any way
whatsoever. But elsewhere we find in a reference to the subject of revocation in divorce ( rijah ), the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 33command to 'bring two just witnesses' (al-Talaq, 65:2). The ulema have on the whole related these two
ayat to one another and the conclusion is drawn that the qualified terms of the second ayah must also be
applied to the first, which would mean that witnesses must be upright and just whether it be a case of a
commercial transaction or of revocation in divorce. This is the settled law, but to relate this to our
discussion over the qat’i’  and the zanni , it will be noted that determining the precise scope of the first
ayah  is open to speculation. Does the requirement of witnesses apply only to sale or to all commercial
transactions? To enter a detailed discussion on this point might seem out of place in the face of the fact
that notwithstanding the clear terms of the Qur’anic injunction, the rules of fiqh as developed by the
majority of ulema, with the exception of the Zahiris, do not require any witnesses either in sale or in the
revocation of divorce. The ulema have, of course, found reasons in support of their rulings both from
within and outside the Qur’an. But even the bare facts we have discussed so far are enough to show that
the Mutlaq  and Muqayyad  are susceptible to speculative reasoning. But to discuss the foregoing
example a little further, it will be noted that the juxtaposition of the two ayat and the conclusion that the
one is qualified by the other is to a large extent based on speculative reasoning. And then the qualified
terms of the second of the two ayat may be taken a step further, and the question is bound to be asked,
as indeed it has been, as to the precise meaning of a just witness. The ulema of the various schools have
differed on the attribute of 'adalah  in a witness and their conclusions are based largely on speculative
ijtihad ,
We need not perhaps discuss in detail the point that the binary division of words into the literal ( Haqiqi )
and metaphorical ( Majazi ) which we shall elsewhere elaborate can also be related to the qat’i’  and
zanni . Although relying on the literal meaning of a word is the norm and a requirement of certainty in
the enforcement of a legal text, it may be necessary at times to depart from the literal in favour of
adopting the metaphorical meaning of a word'. To give an example, talaq  literally means release or
setting free, but as a technical term, it has acquired a specific meaning, and it is the metaphorical
meaning of talaq which is normally applied. The ulema have identified a large variety of grounds on
which the haqiqi  and the Majazi  can be related to one another. The Majazi  is to a large extent
speculative and unreal. Some ulema have even equated the Majazi  with falsehood, and, as such, it has
no place in the Qur'an. It is thus suggested that the Majazi  is not to be relied upon in interpreting the
practical injunctions of the Qur'an. Be this as it may, the point is clear that speculative reasoning has a
wide scope in determining the meaning and application of Haqiqi  and Majazi  in the Qur’an, and indeed
in any other source of Shari’ah .
Furthermore, the ulema have deduced the rules of Shari'ah  not only from the explicit word of the
Qur’an,, which is referred to as the mantuq , but also from the implicit meanings of the text through
inference and logical construction, which is referred to as the implied meaning, or mafhum . Once again,
this subject has been discussed in a separate chapter under al-dalalat , that is, textual implications. The
only purpose of referring to this subject here is to point out that the deduction of the rules of Shari'ah  by
way of inference from the implied meaning of a text partakes in speculative reasoning and ijtihad .

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 34Naturally, not all the ahkam  deduced in this way can be classified as zanni . The implied meaning of a
text can often command the same degree of authority as the explicit ruling of the same text. Having said
this, however, to extend, for example, the requirement of expiation ( kaffarah ) for erroneous killing
which is releasing a slave, or feeding sixty poor persons, or fasting for two months - to the case of
intentional killing on the analysts that the purpose of kaffarah  is compensation for a sin and that this is
true of all types of homicide - is basically no more than speculative ijtihad . This is the implied meaning
the text in sura al-Nisa', 4:92, which is explicit on the kaffarah  of erroneous killing. But the implied
meaning of this text does not command the same degree of certainty as the clear words thereof, which is
why the ulema are not in agreement on it.
In the discussion of the qat’i  and zanni , the Qur’an and Sunnah  are seen as complementary and integral
to one another. The reason is that the speculative of the Qur’an can be made definitive by the Sunnah
and vice versa. The zanni  of the Qur'an may be elevated into qat’i’  by means of corroborative evidence
in the Qur’an itself or in the Sunnah . Similarly, the zanni  of the Sunnah  may be elevated into qat’i’  by
means of corroborative evidence in the Sunnah  itself or in the Qur’an. And then the zanni  of both the
Qur’an and Sunnah  may be elevated into qat’i  by means of a conclusive ijma’ , especially the ijma of
Companions.
As stated above, a speculative indication in the text of the Qur’an or Hadith may be supported by a
definitive evidence in either, in which case it is as valid as one which was definitive in the first place.
To illustrate this, all the solitary ( ahad ) ahadith  which elaborate the definitive Qur’anic prohibition of
usury ( riba) in sura 2:275 are speculative by virtue of being Ahad . But since their substance is
supported by the definitive text of the Qur’an, they become definitive despite any doubt that may exist
in respect of their authenticity. Thus as a general rule, all solitary ahadith  whose authenticity is open to
speculation are elevated to the rank of qat’i’  if they can be substantiated by clear evidence in the
Qur’an. [Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 9; Qattan, Tashri’ , p. 82.] However, if the zanni  cannot be so substantiated by the qat’i’ ,
it is not binding unless it can be validated by some evidence which may lead to one of the following
two possibilities. Firstly, the zanni  is found to be in conflict with a qat’i  of the Qur’an, in which case it
must be rejected. To illustrate this, it is reported that the widow of the Prophet, A'ishah, rejected the
alleged Hadith that the (soul of the) deceased is tortured by the weeping of his relatives over his death,[Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 9.] the reason being that this was contrary to the definitive text of the Qur’an (al-An'am,
6:164) which provides that 'no soul may be burdened with the burden of another soul'. And secondly,
the speculative indication may be such that it cannot be related to a definitive evidence in any way. The
ulema have differed on this; some would advise suspension while others would apply the presumption
of permissibility ( ibahah ), but the best view is that the matter is open to ijtihad . [Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 12.]The qat’i  of the Qur’an is an integral part of the dogma, and anyone who rejects or denies its validity
automatically renounces Islam. But denying a particular interpretation of the zanni  does not amount to
transgression. The mujtahid  is entitled to give it an interpretation, and so is the ruler who may select one

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 35of the various interpretations for purposes of enforcement. [Shaltut, Al-Islam , PP. 498-99, Abu Zahrah, Usul , P. 71; Khallaf, ‘ Ilm,
P. 35; Badran, Usul , p. 67.]II. Brevity and Detail ( al-ijmal wa'l-tafsil )By far the larger part of the Qur’anic legislation consists of an enunciation of general principles,
although in certain areas, the Qur'an also provides specific details. Being the principal source of the
Shari’ah , the Qur'an lays down general guidelines on almost every major topic of Islamic law. While
commenting on this point, Abu Zahrah concurs with Ibn Hazm's assessment that 'every single chapter
of fiqh finds its Origin in the Qur'an, which is then explained and elaborated by the Sunnah' . [Abu Zahrah,
Usul , p. 80, where he quotes Ibn Hazm in support of his own view.] On a similar note, al-Shatibi makes the following
observation: Experience shows that every 'alim  who has resorted to the Qur’an in search of the solution
to a problem has found in the Qur’an a principle that has provided him with some guidance on the
subject. [Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 219.]The often-quoted declaration that 'We have neglected nothing in the Book' (al-An'am, 6:38) is held to
mean that the ru'us al-ahkam , that is, the general of law and religion, are exhaustively treated in the
Qur’an. [Abu Zahrah, Usul , P. 70.] That the Qur’an is mainly concerned with general principles is borne out by
the fact that its contents require a great deal of elaboration, which is often provided, although not
exhaustively, by the Sunnah . To give an example, the following Qur’anic ayah  provides the textual
authority for all the material sources of the Shari’ah , namely the Qur’an, the Sunnah , consensus and
analogy. The ayah  reads: 'O you who believe, obey God and obey the Messenger, and those of you who
are in authority; and if you have a dispute concerning any matter refer it to God and to the Messenger . .
.' (al-Nisa', 4:58). 'Obey God' in this ayah  refers to the Qur’an as the first source, 'and obey the
Messenger' refers to the Sunnah  of the Prophet, 'and those of you who are in authority' authorises the
consensus of the ulema. The last portion of the ayah  ('and if you have a dispute. . .') validates qiyas . For
a dispute can only be referred to God and to the Messenger by extending the rulings of the Qur’an and
Sunnah through analogy to similar cases. In this sense one might say that the whole body of usul al-fiqh
is a commentary on this single Qur’anic ayah . [Sabuni, Muwafaqat , P. 31. For a further discussion of this ayah  see below in the sections
of this work on the hujjiyyah  of Sunnah , ijma’  and qiyas  respectively.] Al-Shatibi further observes that wherever the Qur’an
provides specific details it is related to the exposition and better understanding of its general principles.[Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 217] Most of the legal contents of the Qur’an consist of general rules, although it
contains specific injunctions on a number of topics. Broadly speaking, the Qur’an is specific on matters
which are deemed to be unchangeable, but in matters which are liable to change, it merely lays down
general guidelines.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 36The Qur’anic legislation on civil, economic, constitutional and international affairs is, on the whole,
confined to an exposition of the general principles and objectives of the law. With regard to civil
transactions, for example, the nusus  of the Qur’an on the fulfillment of contracts, the legality of sale,
the prohibition of usury, respect for the property of others, the documentation of loans and other forms
of deferred payments are all concerned with general principles. Thus in the area of contracts, the
Qur’anic legislation is confined to the bare minimum of detail, [Of the two ayat on the subject of contracts, one is in the form
of a command and the other in the form of a question, as follows: 'O you believers, fulfill your contracts' (al-Ma’idah, 5: 1) . and 'O you believers, why do you say
things which you do not carry through?' (al-Saff, 61:2). These are, in turn, confirmed by another ayah  (al-Nisa', 4:58) where an emphasis is laid on the fulfillment
of trusts and the principle of fair treatment: ‘God commands you to turn over trusts to those to whom they belong, and when you judge among people, judge
righteously.' Contracts must therefore not amount to a violation of justice, a breach of trust, or a departure from the moral ideals of the law.] and in the
area of civil transactions and property, the believers are enjoined to 'devour not the properties of one
another unlawfully, but let there be lawful trade by mutual consent' (al-Nisa, 4:29). Elsewhere we read
in surah al-Baqarah (2:275) that 'God has permitted sale and prohibited usury'. The detailed varieties of
lawful trade, the forms of unlawful interference with the property of others, and the varieties of usurious
transactions, are matters which the Qur’an has not elaborated. Some of these have been explained and
elaborated by the Sunnah . As for the rest, it is for the scholars and the mujtahidun  of every age to
specify them in the light of the general principles of the Shari’ah  and the needs and interests of the
people. [Cf. Badran, Bayan , pp. 2-3]In the sphere of crimes and penalties, the Qur’anic legislation is specific with regard to only five
offences, namely murder, theft, highway robbery, zina and slanderous accusation. As for the rest, the
Qur’an authorises the community and those who are in charge of their affairs (i.e. the ulu al-amr ) to
determine them in the light of the general principles of Shari’ah  and the prevailing conditions of
society. Once again the Qur’an lays down the broad principles of penal law when it provides that 'the
punishment of an evil is an evil like it' (al-Shura, 42:40), and 'when you decide to punish then punish in
proportion to the offence committed against you' (al-Nahl, 16:126).
In the area of international relations, the Qur’an lays down rules which regulate war with the
unbelievers and expound the circumstances in which their property may be possessed in the form of
booty. But the general principle on which relations between Muslims and non-Muslims are to be
regulated is stated in the following passage:
God does not forbid you to act considerately towards those who have
never fought you over religion nor evicted you from your homes, nor
[does he forbid you] to act fairly towards them. God loves the
fairminded. He only forbids you to be friendly with the ones who have
fought you over [your] religion and evicted you from your homes and
have abetted others in your eviction. Those who befriend them are
wrongdoers (al-Mumtahinah, 60:8-9).

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 37Similarly, the Qur’anic commandments to do justice are confined to general guidelines and no details
are provided regarding the duties of the judge or the manner in which testimony should be given. [Shaltut,
Al-Islam , p. 501.] On the principles of government, such as consultation, equality and the rights of citizens,
the Qur’an does not provide any details. The general principles are laid down, and it is for the
community, the ulema and leaders to organise their government in the light of the changing conditions
of society [Sabuni, Madkhal , P. 73.] The Qur’an itself warns the believers against seeking the regulation or
everything by the express terms of divine revelation, as this is likely to lead to rigidity and cumbersome
restrictions: 'O you believers, do not keep asking about things which, if they were expounded to you,
would become troublesome for you. . .' (5:104). In this way, the Qur’an discourages the development of
an over-regulated society. Besides, what the Qur'an has left unregulated is meant to be devised, in
accord with the general objectives of the Lawgiver, through mutual consultation and ijtihad.  A careful
reading of the Qur’an further reveals that on matters pertaining to belief, the basic principles of
morality, man's relationship with his Creator, and what are referred to as ghaybiyyat , that is
transcendental matters which are characteristically unchangeable, the Qur’an is clear and detailed, as
clarity and certainty are the necessary requirement of belief. In the area of ritual performances ( ibadat )
such as salah , fasting and hajj, on the other hand, although these too are meant to be unchangeable, the
Qur’an is nevertheless brief, and most of the necessary details have been supplied by the Sunnah . An
explanation for this is that ritual performances are all of a practical, or 'amali , nature and require clear
instructions which are best provided through practical methods and illustration. With regard to salah ,
legal alms  (zakat ) and hajj, for example, the Qur'an simply commands the believers to ‘perform the
salah , and pay the zakat'  and states that 'pilgrimage to the house is a duty, that God has imposed on
mankind' (al-Nahl, 116:44 and Al-'Imran, 3:97, respectively). With regard to salah , the Prophet has
ordered his followers to 'perform salah  the way you see me performing it',
and regarding the hajj he similarly instructed people to 'take from me the rituals of the hajj. [Shatibi,
Muwafaqat , III, 178; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 122; Khallaf, ‘ Ilm, p. 167.]


Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 38The details of zakat  such as the quorum, the amount to be given and its numerous other conditions have
been supplied by the Sunnah .
The Qur’an also contains detailed rules on family matters, the prohibited degrees of relationship in
marriage, inheritance and specific punishments for certain crimes. These are, for the most part,
associated with human nature and regulate the manner in which man's natural needs may be fulfilled.
The basic objectives of the law regarding these matters are permanent. They are, however, matters
which lead to disputes. The purpose of regulating them in detail is to prevent conflict among people.
The specific rulings of the Qur’an in these areas also took into consideration the prevalence of certain
entrenched social customs of Arabia which were overruled and abolished. The Qur’anic reforms
concerning the status of women, and its rules on the just distribution of property within the family
could, in view of such customs, only be effective if couched in clear and specific detail. [Cf. Sabuni, Madkhal , P.
72; Badran, Bayan , P. 4.]The Qur’an frequently provides general guidelines on matters of law and religion, which are often
specified by the Qur’an itself; otherwise the Sunnah  specifies the general in the Qur’an and elaborates
its brief and apparently ambiguous provisions. By far the larger part of Qur’anic legislation is conveyed
in general terms which need to be specified in relation to particular issues. This is partly why we find
that the study of the 'Amm  (general) and Khass  (particular) acquires a special significance in the
extraction of substantive legal rules from the general provisions of the Qur’an. Once again the fact that
legislation in the Qur’an mainly occurs in brief and general terms has to a large extent determined the
nature of the relationship between the Qur’an and Sunnah . Since the general, the ambiguous and the
difficult portions of the Qur’an were in need of elaboration and takhsis  (specification), the Prophet was
expected to provide the necessary details and determine the particular focus of the general rulings of the
Qur’an. It was due to these and other such factors that a unique relationship was forged between the
Sunnah  and the Qur’an in that the two are often integral to one another and inseparable. By specifying
the general and by clarifying the mujmal  in the Qur’an, the Sunnah  has undoubtedly played a crucial
role in the development of Shari'ah . It is the clear and the specific ( Khass  ) in the Qur’an and Sunnah
which provides the core and kernel of the Shari’ah  in the sense that no law can be said to have any
reality if all or most of it were to consist of brief and general provisions. To that extent, the specifying
role of the Sunnah  in its relationship to the Qur’an is of central importance to Shari'ah . And yet the
general in the Qur’an has a value of its own. In it lies the essence of comprehensive guidance and of the
permanent validity of the Qur’an. It is also the 'Amm  of the Qur’an which has provided scope and
substance for an ever-continuing series of commentaries and interpretations. The ulema and
commentators throughout the centuries have attempted to derive a fresh message, a new lesson or a new
principle from the Qur’an that was more suitable to the realities of their times and the different phases
of development in the life of the community. This was to a large extent facilitated by the fact that the
Qur’an consisted for the most part of broad principles which could be related to a variety of
circumstances. To give one example, on the subject of consultation ( shura ) the Qur’an contains only

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 39two ayat, both of which are general. One of these commands the Prophet to 'consult them [the
community] in their affairs' (Al-Imran, 3:159) and the other occurs in the form of praise to the Muslim
community on account of the fact that 'they conduct their affairs by consultation among them' (Al-
Shura, 42:38). The fact that both these are general proclamations has made it possible to relate them to
almost any stage of development in the socio-political life of the community. The Qur’an has not
specified the manner as to how the principle of shura should be interpreted; it has not specified any
subject on which consultation must take place, nor even any person or authority who should be
consulted. These are all left to the discretion of the community. In its capacity as the vicegerent of God
and the locus of political authority, the community is at liberty to determine the manner in which the
principle of shura  should be interpreted and enforced. [Cf. Sha'ban, 'Manhaj’ , p. 29.]III. The Five ValuesAs a characteristic feature of Qur'anic legislation, it may be stated here that commands and prohibitions
in the Qur’an are expressed in a variety of forms which are often open to interpretation and ijtihad . The
question as to whether a particular injunction in the Qur’an amounts to a binding command or to a mere
recommendation or even permissibility cannot always be determined from the words and sentences of
its text. The subject of commands and prohibitions need not be elaborated here as this is the theme of a
separate chapter of this work. It will suffice here to note the diversity of the Qur’anic language on
legislation. Broadly speaking, when God commands or praises something, or recommends a certain
form of conduct, or refers to the positive quality of something, or when it is expressed that God loves
such-and-such, or when God identifies something as a cause of bounty and reward, all such expressions
are indicative of the legality ( mashru’iyyah ) of the conduct in question which partakes in the obligatory
and commendable. If the language of the text is inclined on the side of obligation ( wujub ), such as when
there is a definite, demand or a clear emphasis on doing something, the conduct is question in
obligatory ( wajib ), otherwise it is commendable ( mandub ).
Similarly, when God explicitly declares something permissible ( halal ) or grants a permission ( idhn) in
respect of doing something, or when it is said that there is 'no blame' or 'no sin' accrued from doing
something, or when God denies the prohibition of something, or when the believers are reminded of the
bounty of God in respect of things that are created for their benefit, [Note, e.g., 'and He created for you ships and cattle on
which you ride' (al-Zukhruf,, 43:12), and 'He created cattle from which you derive warmth ... and you eat of their meat' (al-Nahl, 16:5), and 'say, who has forbidden
the beautiful gifts of God which He has produced for His servants, and the clean food for their sustenance' (al-A’raf,7:32).] all such expressions are
indicative of permissibility ( ibahah ) and option ( takhyir ) in respect of the conduct or the object in
question.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 40Whenever God demands the avoidance of a certain conduct, or when He denounces a certain act, or
identifies it as a cause for punishment, or when a certain conduct is cursed and regarded as the work of
Satan, or when its harmful effects are emphasised, or when something is proclaimed unclean, a sin or a
deviation ( ithm, fisq) - all such expressions are indicative of prohibition which partakes in abomination
(karahah ). If the language is explicit and emphatic in regard to prohibition, the conduct/object in
question becomes haram , otherwise it is reprehensible, or makruh . It is for the mujtahid  to determine
the precise value of such injunctions in the light of both the language of the text as well as the general
objectives and principles of the Shari’ah . [Cf. Sha’bin,'Manhaj', pp. 22-23.]This style of Qur’anic legislation, and the fact that it leaves room for flexibility in the evaluation of its
injunctions, is once again in harmony with the timeless validity of its laws. The Qur’an is not specific
on the precise value of its injunctions, and it leaves open the possibility that a command in the Qur’an
may sometimes imply an obligation, a recommendation or a mere permissibility. The Qur’an does not
employ the categories known as the five values ( al-ahkam al-khamsah ) which the fuqaha ' have
attempted to specify in juristic manuals. When an act is evaluated as obligatory, it is labeled fard or
wajib ; when it is absolutely forbidden, it is evaluated as haram . The shades of values which occur
between these two extremes are primarily religious in character and provide a yardstick which can be
applied to any type of human conduct. But only the two extremes, namely the wajib  and haram ,
incorporate legal commands and prohibitions. The rest are largely non-legal and non-justiciable in a
court of law. The Qur’an thus leaves open the possibility, although not without reservations, of enacting
into haram  what may have been classified by the fuqaha'  of one age as merely reprehensible, or
makruh . Similarly, the recommendable, or mandub , may be elevated into a wajib  if this is deemed to be
in the interest of the community in a different stage of its experience and development.IV. Ratiocination ( ta'lil ) in the Qur’anLiterally ta’lil  means 'causation', or 'search for the causes', and refers to the logical relationship between
the cause and effect. But the ulema of jurisprudence tend to use ta’lil  and its derivative ' illah, for
different purposes. In its juridical usage, 'illah  (i.e. effective cause) does not exactly refer to a causal
relationship between two phenomena; it rather means the ratio  of the law, its value and its purpose.
Broadly speaking, 'illah  refers to the rationale of an injunction, and in this sense, it is synonymous with
hikmah , that is, the purpose and the objective of the law. But there is a difference between 'illah  and
hikmah  which I shall discuss in a subsequent chapter on analogical deduction ( qiyas ). There is another
Arabic word, namely sabab , which is synonymous with 'illah , and the two are often used
interchangeably. Yet the ulema of usul tend to use sabab  in reference to devotional matters ( ibadat ) but

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 41use 'illah  in all other contexts. Thus it is said that the arrival of Ramadan is the cause ( sabab ) of fasting
but that intoxication is the 'illah  of the prohibition in wine-drinking. [Cf. Ahmad Hasan, 'Rationality' , p. 101.]The authority of the Qur’an as the principal source of the Shari’ah  is basically independent of
ratiocination. The believers are supposed to accept its rulings regardless of whether they can be
rationally explained. Having said this, however, there are instances where the Qur’an justifies its rulings
with a reference to the benefits that accrue from them, or the objectives which they may serve. Such
explanations are often designed to make the Qur’an easier to understand. To give an example in the
context of encounters between members of the opposite sex, the believers are enjoined in sura al-Nur
(24:30) 'to avert their glances and to guard their private parts'. The text then goes on to provide that in
doing so they will attain greater chastity of character and conduct. To give another example, in sura al-
Hashr (59:7) the Qur'an regulates the distribution of booty among the needy, the orphans and the
wayfarers 'so that wealth does not merely circulate among the wealthy'. In the first ayah , averting the
glance is justified as it obstructs the means to promiscuity and zina. The ruling in the second ayah  is
justified as it prevents the accumulation of wealth in a few hands. Whereas the foregoing are instances
in which the text explicitly states the 'illah  of the injunctions concerned, on numerous other occasions
the jurists have identified the 'illah  through reasoning and ijtihad . The identification of 'illah  in many of
the following for example, is based on speculative reasoning on which the ulema are not unanimous:
that arrival of the specified time is the cause ( sabab  or 'illah ) of the prayer, that the month of Ramadan
is the cause fasting, that the existence of the Ka'bah is the cause of hajj; that owning property is the
cause of zakat , that theft is the cause of amputation of the hand, that traveling is the cause of shortening
the prayer and that intentional killing is the cause of retaliation. These and other similar conclusions
with regard to the assignment of 'illah  have been drawn in the light of supportive evidence in the
Qur’an and Sunnah , but even so many of them are disputed by the ulema. These examples will in the
meantime serve to show the difference between the literal/logical meaning of " illah'  and its juridical
usage among the ulema of jurisprudence. [Cf. Ahmad Hasan, ' Rationality' , p. 104.]The question arises as to whether the incidence of ta’lil  in the Qur’an gives the mujtahid  the green light
to enquire into the causes and reasons behind its injunctions, or whether it exists simply to facilitate a
better understanding of the text. The ulema have held different views on this issue. The opponents of
ta’lil  maintain that divine injunctions embodied in the clear text have no causes unless the Lawgiver
provides us with clear indications to the contrary. Thus it would not only be presumptuous on the part
of the mujtahid  to adopt an inquisitive approach to divine injunctions, but searching for the cause
('illah ) or the objective hikmah  of the Qur’anic rules amounts to no more than an exercise in
speculation. Besides, the opponents of ta’lil  have argued that the believer should surrender himself to
the will of God, which can best be done by unquestioning acceptance of God's injunctions. To look into
the motive, purpose and rationale of such injunctions, and worse still, to accept them on their rational
merit, is repugnant to sincerity in submission to God. Furthermore, in his attempt to identify the
rationale of an injunction, the mujtahid  can only make a reasonable guess which cannot eliminate the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 42possibility of error. There may even be more than one cause or explanation to a particular ruling of the
Qur’an, in which case one cannot be certain which of the several causes might be the correct one. This
is the view of the Zahiris. The majority of ulema have, however, held that the ahkam  of the Shari’ah
contemplate certain objectives, and when such can be identified, it is not only permissible to pursue
them but it is our duty to make an effort to identify and to implement them. Since the realisation of the
objectives ( maqasid ) of the Shari’ah  necessitates identification of the cause/rationale of the ahkam , it
becomes our duty to discover these in order to be able to pursue the general objectives of the Lawgiver.[Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VIII, 76ff; Sabuni, Madkhal , P. 75. For further discussion on ta’lil  in the Qur’an see the section on qiyas  below where ta’lil  is discussed in
connection with the ‘ illah of qiyas .] Thus it is the duty of the mujtahid  to identify the proper causes of divine
injunctions, especially in the event where more than one 'illah  can be attributed to a particular
injunction. The majority view on ta'lil takes into account the analysis that the rules of Shari’ah  have
been introduced in order to realise certain objectives and that the Lawgiver has enacted the detailed
rules of Shari’ah , not as an end in themselves, but as a means to realising those objectives. In this way,
any attempt to implement the law should take into account not only the externalities of the law but also
the rationale and the intent behind it. Thus when a man utters the credo of Islam to achieve worldly gain
or to attain social prestige, his confession is not valid. The reason is that the true purpose of confession
to the faith is the exaltation and worship of God, and if this is violated, a formal confession is of no
value. Similarly, if a man says a prayer for the sake of display and self-commendation, it is not valid.
The real purpose and value of the law is therefore of primary importance, and indeed it is necessary that
the mujtahid  identifies it so as to be able to implement the law in accordance with its purpose. The
Qur’an admittedly requires unquestioning obedience to God and to His Messenger, but at the same
time, it exhorts men to understand the spirit and purpose of God's injunctions. Time and time again, the
Qur’an invites the believers to rational enquiry, as opposed to blind imitation, in the acceptance of its
messages. [Cf. Ahmad Hasan, 'Rationality',  102.]Ta’lil acquires a special significance in the context of analogical deduction. ‘ Illah  is an essential
requirement, indeed the sine qua non  of analogy. To enable the extension of an existing rule of the
Shari’ah  to similar cases, the mujtahid  must establish a common ‘ illah between the original and the
new case. Without the identification of a common 'illah between two parallel cases, no analogy can be
constructed. To this it may be added that there is a variety of qiyas , known as qiyas mansus al-‘illah , or
qiyas  whose 'illah  is indicated in the nass, in which the 'illah  of the law is already identified in the text.
When the ‘ illah is so identified, there remains no need for the mujtahid  to establish the effective cause
of the injunction by recourse to reasoning or ijtihad . However, this variety of qiyas  is limited in scope
when it is compared to qiyas  whose 'illah  is not so indicated on the nusus . It thus remains true to say
that ta'lil, that is, the search to identify the 'effective cause of the shari’ah  rules, is of central importance
to qiyas . Further discussion on the ‘illah  of analogy, the manner of its identification, and rules which
govern the propriety of ta'lil in qiyas  can be found in our discussion of qiyas  in a separate chapter
below.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 43There seems to be a confusion on the part of the opponents of ta’lil  as to the purpose and nature of
ta’lil . The opponents of ta’lil  seem to have perceived this phenomenon as a sign of impudence and
impropriety in belief. In reality, however, this need not be the case. One may attempt ta’lil  while
remaining totally faithful to the divine origin and essence of the Qur’an. To exercise ta’lil  does not
lessen either the binding power or the holiness of the divine injunctions. We may, for example, offer
various interpretations of the cause of performing the salah  or of giving zakah ; but whether we can
understand the reason or not, salah  and zakah  are still obligatory upon Muslims.V. Inimitability ( i'jaz) of the Qur’anThis is reflected in at least four aspects of the Qur’an. First, in its linguistic excellence: many scholars
have pointed out that there exists no piece of literature that can match the literary excellence of the
Qur’an with respect to both content and form. [Note for example sura al-Baqarah (2:23) which reads: 'If you are in any doubt about what
We have sent to Our servant, then bring a chapter like it and call in your witnesses besides God, if you are truthful.'] It is neither poetry nor prose;
its rhythm and its genre and word structure are unique. It is the spiritual miracle of the prophethood of
Muhammad, who never learned to read or write, and it is considered to have been far beyond his own
ability to produce a linguistic artefact of this kind. In more than one place, the Qur’an challenges those
who deny its divine origin by asking them to produce anything to match it. [Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 65; Sabuni, Madkhal ,
P. 45.]The second aspect of i’jaz in the Qur’an is its narration of events which took place centuries ago. The
accuracy of the Qur’anic narratives concerning such events is generally confirmed by historical
evidence. [von Den ffer, ‘ Ulum , P. 152.]The third aspect of i’jaz in the Qur’an is its accurate prediction of future events, such as the victory of
the Muslims in the battle of Badr (al-Anfal, 8:7), the conquest of Mecca (al-Fath, 48:27) and the
eventual defeat of the Persians by the Roman empire: The Romans were defeated in a land near-by, but
even after this defeat, they will be victorious in a few years ( fi bid’i sinin ; literally in a period lasting up
to ten years)' (al-Rum, 30:2). The Romans were defeated by the Persians when the latter took Jerusalem
in 614 A.D. But seven years later the Persians were defeated when the Romans won the battle of Issus
in 622. [For further details on i’jaz see von Denffer, 'Ulum , PP. 152-57; Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 65-66; Khallaf, ‘ Ilm, PP. 25-27.]The fourth aspect of i’jaz in the Qur’an is manifested in its scientific truth concerning the creation of
man, the earth and the planetary system. The tenets thus inform us:

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 44• 'We created man from an extract of clay, then We placed him as a drop of semen in a secure
resting-place. Then We turned the drop into a clot; next We turned the clot into tissue; and then
We turned the tissue into bones and clothed the bones with flesh' (al-Mu'minun, 23:12-14).
• That the earth was previously a part of the sun, and only after it was separated from the sun did
it become suitable for human habitation (al-Anbiya', 21:30).
• That all life originated in water (al-Anbiya', 21:30).
• That originally the universe consisted of fiery gas (Ha-mim, 41: 11).
• That matter is made up of minute particles (Yunus, 10:62).
• That fertilisation of certain plants is facilitated by the wind (al-Hijr, 15:22).
Another manifestation of i’jaz in the Qur’an is to be seen in its humanitarian, legal and cultural reforms
that were unprecedented in the history of nations. Thus in the sphere of government, the ruler and the
ruled were both equally subjected to adjudication under the rule of law. [For further details on the principles of
government under the rule of law - also referred to as the principle of legality - see my article 'The Citizen and State', P. 30ff.] In the area of civil
transactions and commerce, the Qur’an established mutual agreement as the norm and essence of all
contracts. The principal Qur’anic reform in the area of property was the introduction of the doctrine of
istikhlaf : the Qur’an declares that all property belongs to God, and that man, in his capacity as the
vicegerent of God, is a mere trustee, whose exercise of the right of ownership is subjected to the
maslahah  of society to be supervised by the government. In the sphere of international relations, treaty
relations, the conduct of war, and treatment of prisoners of war; all were regulated by a set of principles
which aimed at the realisation of justice and respect for human dignity. Relations among individuals
were to be governed by the principles of freedom and equality, and the state was equally subjected to
the observance, and indeed the protection, of these values. [Cf. Sabuni, Madkbal , P. 46; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 67; Kamali, 'The
Citizen',  15ff.]VI. Occasions of Revelation ( asbab al-nuzul )Asbab al-nuzul  deal with the phenomenology of the Qur’an, and explain the events which are related to
the revelation of its particular passages. The well-known asbab al-nuzul  have been related to us by
reliable Companions. It is a condition for the reliability of such reports that the person relating it should
have been present at the time or the occasion which is relevant to a particular passage. The authenticity
of such reports is subject to the same rules as are applied to Hadith in general. In this way, reports from
the Successors ( tabi'un ) only which do not go back to the Prophet and his Companions are considered
to be weak ( da'if). [von Denffer, 'Ulum , P. 93ff.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 45The knowledge of asbab al-nuzul  is necessary for anyone who wishes to acquire more than a superficial
knowledge of the Qur’an, and there are at least two main reasons to explain this. One of these is that
knowledge of words and concepts is incomplete without the knowledge of the context and the nature of
the audience. For a form of speech - a question for example - may also convey other meanings such as
elucidation, surprise, or reprimand, etc. Similarly, a command may mean a mere permissibility, a
recommendation, or a threat, etc., depending on the circumstances in which it is issued and the nature of
the audience. An incidental meaning or a shade of expression may at times reflect the main purpose of a
particular text and this cannot be known without the knowledge of the asbab al-nuzul . Ignorance of the
asbab al-nuzul  may thus lead to the omission or misunderstanding of a part or even the whole of an
injunction. [Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 201.] Secondly, ignorance of asbab al-nuzal  may lead to unwarranted
disagreement and even conflict. For the Qur'an comprises passages which are in the nature of
probability ( zahir ) and ambiguity ( mujmal ). Such instances in the text can be clarified by reference to
the circumstances in which they were received. It is reported that in a conversation with 'Abd Allah ibn
‘Abbas, 'Umar ibn al-Khattab asked him: 'Why should there be disagreement among this ummah , all of
whom follow the same Prophet and pray in the direction of the same qiblah ?' To this Ibn 'Abbas replied,
'O Commander of the Faithful, the Qur’an was sent down to us, we read it and we know the
circumstances in which it was revealed. But there may be people after us who will read the Qur’an
without knowing the occasions of its revelation. Thus they will form their own opinion, which might
lead to conflict and even bloodshed among them.'
‘Umar disagreed with Ibn 'Abbas for saying so at first but, when the latter departed, ‘Umar pondered
over what he had said. He then sent for Ibn ‘Abbas only to tell him that he agreed with his view. [Shatibi,
Muwafaqat , III, p. 202.] It has been observed that by making this remark, Ibn ‘Abbas was referring to certain
misinterpretations of the Qur’an which had occurred owing to ignorance of the asbab al-nuzul . In
particular, some of the Qur’anic passages had been revealed concerning the unbelievers, but were taken
by some commentators to be of general application to Muslims and non-Muslims alike. There were also
passages in the Qur’an which were revealed in reference to the conduct of people who had died before
the revelation of certain rulings, and yet these were taken by some commentators to be of general
application. [Khudari, Usul , pp. 209-210. Thus when Qudamah b. Maz'un was charged with the offence of wine-drinking, ‘Umar b. al-Khattab decided to
punish him, but the defendant cited the Qur’anic ayah  in sura al-Ma’idah (5:95) in his own defence. This ayah  reads 'there is no blame on those who believe and do
good deeds for what they consume provided they are God-fearing believers… ' Ibn Maz'un claimed that he was one of them. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas refuted this
view and explained that this particular ayah  had been revealed concerning people who died before wine-drinking was definitively forbidden.]Furthermore, the knowledge of asbab al-nuzul  is informative of the conditions of the Arab society at
the time. Their customary and linguistic usages and their nuances of expression were naturally reflected
in the Qur’an. The peculiarities of Arab social customs often gave exegesis of the Qur’anic text a
perspective and offered solutions to some of the doubts/ambiguities which would otherwise be difficult
to understand. The asbab al-nuzul  take full cognizance of the customary practices of Arabian society
and the relationship, if any, of such practices to Qur’anic legislation. To give an example, the Qur’anic

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 46ayah  'Our Lord punish us not, if we forget or make a mistake' (al-Baqarah, 2:286), is held to be
referring to unbelief, that is, when words which partake in unbelief are uttered inadvertently. This is
forgiven just as are words of unbelief that are expressed under duress. However, the exemption here is
not extended to similar pronouncements, such as statements of divorce, freeing of a slave, or sale and
purchase, for freeing a slave was not known in the custom of the Arabs nor were the inhibitions over
oath-taking ( ayman ). The general support of this ayah  is thus given a concrete application in the light of
the prevailing custom. [Khudari, Usul , p.211.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 47Chapter Three: The SunnahIntroductionLiterally, Sunnah means a clear path or a beaten track but it has also been used to imply normative
practice, or an established course of conduct. It may be a good example or a bad, and it may be set by
an individual, a sect or a community.[1. Thus we read in a Hadith, 'Whoever sets a good example -  man sanna sunnatan hasanatan - he and
all those who act upon it shall be rewarded till the day of resurrection; and whoever sets a bad example -  man sanna sunnatan sayyi'atan - he and all those who
follow it will carry the burden of its blame till the day of resurrection ' For details see Isnawi, Nihayah , II, 170; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 33.] In pre-Islamic
Arabia, the Arabs used the word 'Sunnah' in reference to the ancient and continuous practice of the
community which they inherited from their forefathers. Thus it is said that the pre-Islamic tribes of
Arabia had each their own sunnah which they considered as a basis of their identity and pride.[2. For details
see Guraya, Origins , p. 8ff; Ahmad Hasan, Early Development , p. 85.] The opposite of Sunnah is bid'ah, or innovation, which is
characterized by lack of precedent and continuity with the past. In the Qur'an' the word 'Sunnah' and its
plural, sunan , have been used on a number of occasions (16 times to be precise). In all these instances,
sunnah has been used to imply an established practice or course of conduct. To the ulema of Hadith,
Sunnah refers to all that is narrated from the Prophet, his acts, his sayings and whatever he has tacitly
approved, plus all the reports which describe his physical attributes and character. The ulema of
jurisprudence, however, exclude the description of the physical features of the Prophet from the
definition of Sunnah.[3. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 47; Azami, Studies , p. 3. ] Sunnah al-Nabi (or Sunnah al-Rasul), that is, the
Prophetic Sunnah, does not occur in the Qur'an as such. But the phrase uswah hasanah (excellent
conduct) which occurs in sura-al-Ahzab (33:21) in reference to the exemplary conduct of the Prophet is
the nearest Qur'anic equivalent of Sunnah al-Nabi.[4. The  ayah in question addres ses the believers in the following terms: 'Certainly
you have, in the Messenger of God, an excellent example' (al-Ahzab, 33:21).] The uswah, or example of the Prophet, was later
interpreted to be a reference to his Sunnah.  The Qur’an also uses the word 'hikmah' (lit-wisdom)  as a
source of guidance that accompanies the Qur'an itself . Al-Shafi'i quotes at least seven instances in the
Qur'an where 'hikmah' occurs next to al-kitab (the Book). In one of these passages, which occurs in sura
Al-Jum'ah (62:2), for example, we read that God Almighty sent a Messenger to educate and to purify
the people by 'teaching them the Book and the hikmah'. According to al-Shafi'i's interpretation' which
also represents the view of the majority, the word 'hikmah' in this context means the Sunnah of the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 48Prophet.[5. Shafi'i, Risalah , pp. 44-45; Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p.50. ] Both the terms 'Sunnah' and Sunnah Rasul Allah' have been
used by the Prophet himself and his companions. Thus when the Prophet sent Mu'adh b. Jabal as judge
to the Yemen, he was asked as to the sources on which he would rely in making decisions. In reply
Mu'adh referred first to the 'Book of Allah' and then to the 'Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah'.[6. Abu
Dawud, Sunan (Hasan's trans.), III, 1019, Hadith no. 3585.]In another Hadith, the Prophet is reported to have said, 'I left two things among you. You shall not go
astray so long as you hold on to them: the Book of Allah and my Sunnah (sunnati).[7. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 197;
Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I, 222.]There is evidence to suggest that the Sunnah of the Prophet was introduced into the legal theory by the
jurists of Iraq towards the end of the first century. The term 'Sunnah of the Prophet' occurs' for example,
in two letters which are addressed to the Umayyad ruler, 'Abd al-Malik b. Marwan (d. 86) by the
Kharijite leader 'Abd Allah b. lbad, and al-Hasan al-Basri. But this might mean that the earliest
available record on the establishment of terminology dates back to the late first century. This evidence
does not necessarily prove that the terminology was not in use before then.[8. For details see Guraya, Origins , p. 5.]Initially the use of the term ‘ Sunnah’ was not restricted to the Sunnah of the Prophet but was used to
imply the practice of the community and precedent of the Companions. This usage of 'Sunnah' seems to
have continued till the late second century when al-Shafi'i tried to restrict it to the Sunnah of the
Prophet alone. Sometimes the Arabic definite article 'al' was prefixed to Sunnah to denote the Sunnah
of the Prophet while the general usage of Sunnah as a reference to the practice of the community, or its
living tradition, continued. By the end of the second century Hijrah, the technical/juristic meaning of
Sunnah appears to have become dominant until the ulema used it exclusively to imply the normative
conduct of the Prophet.[9. Cf. Azami, Studies , p. 4.] The ulema thus discouraged the use of such expressions as
the Sunnah of Abu Bakr or 'Umar. In their view, the proper usages of Sunnah were to be confined to
Sunnah Allah, and Sunnah Rasul Allah, that is the Sunnah of God, or His way of doing things, and the
Sunnah of His Messenger. But there were variant opinions among the ulema which disputed the
foregoing, especially in view of the Hadith in which the Prophet is reported to have said, 'You are to
follow my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the Rightly-Guided caliphs.'
But again, as al-Shawkani points out, it is possible that in this Hadith, the Prophet had used 'Sunnah' as
a substitute for 'tariqah' or the way that his Companions had shown.[10. Abu Dawud, Sunan , III, 1294, Hadith no. 4590;
Shawkani, Irshad , p.33. ] Al-Shawkani's interpretation might suggest that the Prophet may not have used
'Sunnah' in the exclusive sense that the ulema later attempted to attach to this term.
In its juristic usage, 'Sunnah' has meant different things. To the ulema of usul al-fiqh, Sunnah refers to a
source of the Shari'ah and a legal proof next to the Qur'an. But to the ulema of fiqh, 'Sunnah' primarily
refers to a shar'i value which falls under the general category of mandub. Although in this sense,

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 49Sunnah is used almost synonymously with mandub, it does not necessarily mean that Sunnah is
confined to the Mandub. For in its other usage, namely as a source of Shari'ah, Sunnah may authorize
and create not only a mandub but also any of the following: wajib, haram, makruh and mubah. Thus in
the usage of usul al-fiqh, one might say that this or that ruling has been validated by the Qur'an or by
the Sunnah' whereas a faqih would be inclined to say that this or that act is Sunnah, which means that it
is neither fard nor wajib, it is one of the five values which falls under the category of mandub.[11. Isnawi,
Nihayah , II, 170; Shawkani, Irshad , p.33; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 264.]Notwithstanding the fact that the ulema have used Sunnah and Hadith, almost interchangeably, the two
terms have meanings of their own. Literally, Hadith means a narrative, communication or news
consisting of the factual account of an event. The word occurs frequently in the Qur'an (23 times to be
precise) and in all cases it carries the meaning of a narrative or communication. In none of these
instances has Hadith been used in its technical sense, that is, the exclusive saying of the Prophet. In the
early days of Islam following the demise of the Prophet, stories relating to the life and activities of the
Prophet dominated all other kinds of narratives, so the word began to be used almost exclusively to a
narrative from, or a saying of, the Prophet. [12. Cf. Azami, Studies , pp. 1-3 ]Hadith differs from Sunnah  in the sense that Hadith is a narration of the conduct of the Prophet whereas
Sunnah  is the example or the law that is deduced from it. Hadith in this sense is the vehicle or the
carrier of Sunnah,  although Sunnah  is a wider concept and used to be so especially before its literal
meaning gave way to its juristic usage. Sunnah  thus preferred not only to the Hadith of the Prophet but
also to the established practice of the community. But once the literal meanings of Hadith and Sunnah
gave way to their technical usages and were both exclusively used in reference to the conduct of the
Prophet, the two became synonymous. This was largely a result of al-Shafi'i's efforts, who insisted that
the Sunnah  must always be derived from a genuine Hadith and that there was no Sunnah outside the
Hadith. In the pre-Shafi'i period, 'Hadith' was also applied to the statements of the Companions and
their Successors, the tabi'un.  It thus appears that 'Hadith' began to be used exclusively for the acts and
sayings of the Prophet only after the distinction between the Sunnah and Hadith was set aside.[13. Cf. Ahmad
Hasan, Early Development , p. 48; Shabir, Authority of Hadith , pp. 2-3. ]There are two other terms, namely khabar  and athar' which have often been used as alternatives to
'Hadith'. Literally, khabar  means 'news or report', and athar,  'impression, vestige or impact'. The word
'khabar'  in the phrase  'khabar  al-wahid'  for example, means a solitary Hadith. The majority of ulema
have used Hadith, khabar  and athar synonymously, whereas others have distinguished khabar  from
athar.  While the former used synonymously with Hadith  athar  (and sometimes ' amal ) is used to imply
the precedent of the Companions. [14. Cf. Azami, Studies , p. 3.]The majority of ulema have upheld the precedent of the Companions as one of the transmitted ( naqli)
proofs. The jurists of the early schools of law are known to have based opinions on athar . Imam Malik

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 50even went so far as to set aside the Prophetic Hadith in its favor on the strength of the argument that
athar  represented the genuine Sunnah , as the Companions were in a better position to ascertain the
authentic Sunnah  of the Prophet. There were indeed, among the Companions, many distinguished
figures whose legal acumen and intimate knowledge of the sources equipped them with a special
authority to issue fatwas . Sometimes they met in groups to discuss the problems they encountered, and
their agreement or collective judgment is also known as athar . For al-Shafi'i (d. 204/819) however,
athar does not necessarily represent the Sunnah of the Prophet. In the absence of a Hadith from the
Prophet, al-Shafi'i followed the precedent of Companions, and in cases where a difference of opinion
existed among the Companions, al-Shafi'i preferred the opinion of the first four caliphs over others, or
one which was in greater harmony with the Qur'an.[15. Shafi'i, Risalah , pp.128-130. ] According to al-Shafi'i, the
Sunnah coming direct from the Prophet in the form of Hadith through a reliable chain of narrators is a
source of law irrespective of whether it was accepted by the community or not. He emphasized the
authority of the Hadith from the Prophet in preference to the opinion or practice of the companions. Al-
Shafi'i' contended that Hadith from the Prophet, even a solitary Hadith must take priority over the
practice and opinion of the community, the Companions and the Successors.[16. Shafi'i, Risalah , p.177; Guraya,
Origins , p. 29; Ahmad Hasan, Early Development , pp. 49-51.] Al-Shafi'i directed his efforts mainly against the then prevailing
practice among jurists which gave preference to the practice of the community and the decisions of the
Companions, over the Hadith. Al-Shafi'i attempted to overrule the argument, advanced by Imam malik,
for example, that the Madinese practice was more authoritative than Hadith. In his Muwatta, for
example, Malik (d. 179/795) generally opens every legal chapter with a Hadith from the Prophet, but in
determining the detailed legal issues, he does not consistently adhere to the principle of the priority of
Hadith over athar. It is interesting to note that the Muwatta' contains 1,720 Hadiths, out of which 822
are from the Prophet and the remainder from the Companions, Successors and others. This would
suggest that Imam Malik was not overly concerned with the distinction between Hadith, and athar
which was to become the main theme of al-Shafi'i's endeavor to establish the overriding authority of the
Prophetic Hadith.[17. Guraya, Origins , pp. 29-34.]Proof-Value ( Hujjiyyah ) of SunnahThe ulema are unanimous to the effect that Sunnah is a source of Shari'ah and that in its rulings with
regard to halal and haram it stands on the same footing as the Qur'an.' [18. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 33.] The Sunnah
of the Prophet is a proof (hujjah) for the Qur'an, testifies to its authority and enjoins the Muslim to
comply with it. The words of the Prophet, as the Qur'an tells us, are divinely inspired (al-Najm, 53:3).
His acts and teachings that are meant to establish a rule of Shari'ah constitute a binding proof.' [19. Khallaf,
'Ilm, p. 37.] While commenting on the Qur'anic a yah which states of the Prophet that 'he does not speak of
his own desire, it is none other than wahy sent to him', Al-Ghazali writes that some of the divine

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 51revelation which the Prophet received constitutes the Qur'an, whereas the remainder is Sunnah.  The
words of the Prophet are hujjah on anyone who heard the Prophet saying them. As for us and the
generality of Muslims who have received them through the verbal and written reports of narrators, we
need to ascertain their authenticity.[20. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 83. ] The proof of authenticity may be definitive
(qat'i), or it may amount to a preferable conjecture (al-zann al-rajih); in either case, the Sunnah
commands obedience of the mukallaf. All the rulings of the Prophet, especially those which correspond
with the Qur'an and corroborate its contents, constitute binding law. [21. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 37.]In more than one place, the Qur'an enjoins obedience to the Prophet and makes it a duty of the believers
to submit to his judgment and his authority without question. The following ayat are all explicit on this
theme, all of which are quoted by al-Shafi'i in his renowned work, Al-Risalah (P. 47ff):
And whatever the Messenger gives you, take it, and whatever he forbids you, abstain
from it (al-Hashr, 59:7).
Obey God and obey the Messenger and those who are in charge of affairs among you.
Should you happen to dispute over something, then refer it to God and to the
Messenger (al-Nisa', 4:58-59).
To refer the judgment of a dispute to God means recourse to the Qur'an, and referring it to the
Messenger means recourse to the Sunnah.[22. Shatibi,  Muwafaqat , IV, 7.] In another passage, the Qur'an
emphasizes: 'Whoever obeys the Messenger verily obeys God' (al-Nisa 4:80). And finally, the Qur'an is
categorical to the effect that the definitive rulings of the Qur'an and Sunnah are binding on the believers
in that they are no longer at liberty to differ with the dictates of the divine will or to follow a course of
their own choice: 'Whenever God and His Messenger have decided a matter' it is not for a faithful man
or woman to follow another course of his or her own choice' (al-Ahzab, 33:36). In yet another place the
Qur'an stresses that submission to the authority of the Prophet is not a matter of mere formalistic
legality but is an integral part of the Muslim faith: 'By thy Lord, they will not believe till they make thee
a judge regarding disagreements between them and find in themselves no resistance against accepting
your verdict in full submission' (al-Nisa', 4:65). It is concluded from these and other similar passages in
the Qur'an that the Sunnah is a proof next to the Qur'an in all shar'i matters and that conformity to the
terms of Prophetic legislation is a Qur'anic obligation on all Muslims. 'The Companions have reached a
consensus on this point: Both during the lifetime of the Prophet and following his demise' they eagerly
obeyed the Prophet's instructions and followed his examples regardless as to whether his commands or
prohibitions originated in the Qur'an or otherwise. The first two Caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar; resorted
to the Sunnah of the Prophet whenever they knew of it. In cases when they did not know, they would

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 52ascertain if other Companions had any knowledge of the Prophetic Sunnah in connection with particular
issues. The Caliph Umar is also on record as having issued written instruction to his judges in which he
asked them to follow the Sunnah of the Prophet whenever they could not find the necessary guidance in
the Qur'an .[23. Shawkani, Irshad,  p. 36; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 38; Badran, Usul , p. 81.]Classification and Value: ISunnah has been classified in various ways, depending, of course, on the purpose of classification and
the perspective of the investigator. However, two of the most commonly accepted criteria for such
classifications are the subject matter (matn) of Sunnah and the manner of its transmission (isnad). This
section is primarily concerned with the classification of Sunnah from the viewpoint of its subject
matter.
To begin with, the Sunnah is divided into three types, namely verbal (qawli), actual (fi'li) and tacitly
approved (taqriri). The other division of the Sunnah which will concern us here is its division into legal
and non-legal Sunnah.
The verbal Sunnah consist of the sayings of the Prophet on any subject, such as the Hadith 'fi al-sa'imah
zakah': livestock is liable to zakah .[24. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 406, Hadith no. 1562; Amidi, Ihkam , III, 170. ] The Actual Sunnah
of the Prophet consists of his deeds and actual instructions, such as the way he performed the salah, the
fasting, the rituals of hajj, or the transactions he concluded such as sale and giving loans, etc. Similarly,
the fact that the Prophet authorized mutilation of the hand of the thief from the wrist illustrated, in
actual terms, how the Qur'anic ayah (al-Ma'idah' 5:38) should be implemented. This ayah simply
provides that the hand should be cut without specifying exactly from which part. The tacitly approved
Sunnah consists of the acts and sayings of the Companions which came to the knowledge of the Prophet
and of which he approved. The tacit approval of the Prophet may be inferred from his silence and lack
of disapproval, or from his express approval and verbal confirmation.[25. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 36; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 89.]An example of such a Sunnah is the report that two of the Companions went on a journey, and when
they failed to find water for ablution, they both performed the obligatory prayers with tayammum, that
is, wiping the hands, face and feet with clean sand. Later, when they found water, one of them
performed the prayers again whereas the other did not. Upon their return, they related their experience
to the Prophet, who is reported to have approved both courses of action. Hence it became Sunnah
taqririya.[26. Tabrizi, Mishkat,  I, 166, Hadith no 533; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 41; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 36.] Another example of this is the
report that one of the prominent companions, 'Amr b.  al-'As, said that in the campaign of Dhat al-Salasil
he had had a wet dream in the night , but owing to extreme cold he did not take a bath but instead
performed the morning Salah with tayammum. He then related this to the Prophet, who laughed but said

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 53nothing, which would imply that the act in question is permissible in similar circumstances, that is,
when extreme cold proves to be hazardous to health.[27. Abu Dawud, Sunan , I, 88, Hadith no. 334; Badran, Usul , pp. 69-70. ]The sayings of Companions such as, 'we used to do such and such during the lifetime of the Prophet'
constitute a part of Sunnah taqririya only if the subject is such that it could not have failed to attract the
attention of the Prophet. An example of this is the saying of Abu Sa'id al-Khudri that 'for the charity of
'id al-Fitr, we used to give a sa' of dates or of barley'. This is a matter that could not have remained
hidden and therefore constitutes Sunnah taqriria. However, the statement of a companion which refers
to matters of an obscure type, or when the statement itself is vague and does not specify whether the
issue had arisen while the Prophet was alive - such statements do not constitute Sunnah taqriria. [28.
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 61; Badran, Bayan , p. 74. ]The entire bulk of the Sunnah, that is, the sayings, acts and tacit enactments of the Prophet, may be
once again divided into two types: non-legal and legal Sunnah.
Non-legal Sunnah (Sunnah ghayr tashri'iyyah) mainly consists of the ritual activities of the Prophet (al-
af'al al-jibilliyyah) such as the manner which he ate, slept, dressed, and such other activities as do not
seek to constitute a part of the Shari'ah. Activities of this nature are not of primary importance to the
Prophetic mission and therefore do not constitute legal norms. According to the majority of ulema, the
Prophet's preferences in these areas, such as his favorite colors, or the fact that he slept on his right side
in the first place, etc., only indicate the permissibility (ibahah) of the acts in question.[29. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 5
12; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 43.] The reason given is that such acts could be either wajib  or mandub or merely mubah.
The first two can only be established by means of positive evidence: wajib and mandub are normally
held to be absent unless they are proved to exist. Since there is no such evidence to established that the
natural activities of the Prophet fall into either of these two categories, there remains the category of
mubah and they fall in this category for which no positive evidence is necessary. [30. Isnawi, Nihayah , II, 171; Hitu,
Wajiz , p. 272. As for the report that the prominent Companion, 'Abd Allah b. 'Umar used to imitate the Prophet in his natural activities too, it is held that he did so,
not because it was recommended ( mandub ), but because of his devotion and affection for the Prophet.]On a similar note, Sunnah which partakes in specialized or technical knowledge such as medicine,
commerce and agriculture, is once again held to be peripheral to the main function of the Prophetic
mission and is therefore not a part of the Shari'ah. As for acts and sayings of the Prophet that related to
particular circumstances such as the strategy of war , including such devices that misled the enemy
forces, timing of attack, siege withdrawal these too are considered  to be  situational  and not a part of the
Shariah.[31. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 512; Khallaf,  'Ilm, p. 43.]There are certain matters which are peculiar to the person of the Prophet so that his example concerning
them does not constitute general law. For instance, polygamy above the limit of four, marriage without
a dower, prohibition of remarriage for the widows of the Prophet, connected fasting ( sawm al-wisal )

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 54and the fact that the Prophet admitted the testimony of Khuzaymah b. Thabit as legal proof. The rules of
Shari'ah concerning these matters are as stated in the Qur'an, and remain the legal norm for the
generality of Muslims.[32. In particular note suras al-Nisa' (4:3), al-Baqarah (2:282) an d al-Talaq (65:2).] According to the majority
opinion, the position in regard to such matters is partly determined by reference to the relevant text of
the Qur'an and the manner in which the Prophet is addressed. When, for example, the Qur'an addresses
the Prophet in such terms as 'O you Messenger', or 'O you folded up in garments' (al-Muzzammil, 73:1;
al-Muddaththir, 74:1), it is implied that the address is to the Prophet alone unless there is conclusive
evidence to suggest otherwise.[33. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 273; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 44.]Certain activities of the Prophet may fall in between the two categories of legal and non-legal Sunnah
as they combine the attributes of both. Thus it may be difficult to determine whether an act was strictly
personal or was intended to set an example for others to follow. It is also known that at times the
Prophet acted in a certain way which was in accord with the then prevailing custom of the community.
For instance, the Prophet kept his beard at a certain length and trimmed his moustache. The majority of
ulema have viewed this not as a mere observance of the familiar usage at the time but as an example for
the believers to follow. Others have held the opposite view by saying that it was a part of the social
practice of the Arabs which was designed to prevent resemblance to the Jews and some non-Arabs who
used to shave the beard and grow the moustache. Such practices were, in other words, a part of the
current usage and basically optional. Similarly, it is known that the Prophet used to go to the 'id prayers
(salat al-'id ) by one route and return from the mosque by a different route, and that the Prophet at times
performed the  hajj pilgrimage while riding a camel. The Shafi'i jurists are inclined to prefer the
commendable (mandub) in such acts to mere permissibility whereas the Hanafis consider them as
merely permissible, or mubah .[34. Shawkani,  Irshad , p. 35ff; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 90; Hitu,  Wajiz , p. 273.]The legal Sunnah (Sunnah tashri'iyya ) consists of the exemplary conduct of the Prophet, be it an act,
saying, or a tacit approval, which incorporates the rules and principles of Shari'ah. This variety of
Sunnah  may be divided into three types, namely the Sunnah which the Prophet laid down in his
capacities as Messenger of God, as the Head of State or imam, or in his capacity as a judge. We shall
discuss each of these separately, as follows : (a) In his capacity as Messenger of God, the Prophet has
laid down rules which are, on the whole complementary to the Qur’an, but also established rules on
which the Qur'an is silent. In this capacity, the Sunnah may consist of a clarification of the ambiguous
(mujmal) parts of the Qur'an or specifying and qualifying the general and the absolute contents of the
Qur'an. Whatever the Prophet has authorized pertaining the principles of religion, especially in the area
of devotional matters ( ibadat) and rules expounding the lawful and the unlawful, that is, the Halal and
haram, constitutes general legislation (tashri' 'amm) whose validity is not restricted to the limitations of
time and circumstance. All commands and prohibitions that are imposed by the Sunnah are binding in
every Muslim regardless of individual circumstances, social status, or Political office. In acting upon
these laws, the individual normally does not need any prior authorization by a religious leader or the
government.[35. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 513.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 55The question arises as to how it is determined that the Prophet acted in one or the other of his three
capacities as mentioned above. It is not always easy to answer this question in categorical terms. The
uncertainty which has arisen in answering this question in particular cases is, in fact, one of the main
causes of juristic disagreement (ikhtilaf) among the fuqaha'. The ulema have on the whole attempted to
ascertain the main trust, or the direction (jihah) of the particular acts and saying of the prophet. An
enquiry of this nature helps to provide an indication as to the value of the Sunnah in question: whether
it constitutes an obligation, commendation, or ibadah on the one hand, or a prohibition or abomination
(karahah) on the other.
When the direction of an act is known from the evidence in the sources, there remains no doubt as to its
value. If, for example, the prophet attempts to explain an ambiguous ruling of the Qur'an, the
explanation so provided would fall in the same category of values as the original ruling itself.
According to the majority of ulema, if the ambiguous of the Qur'an is known to be obligatory' or
commendable, the explanatory Sunnah would carry the same value. For example, all the practical
instructions of the Prophet which explained and illustrated the obligatory Salah would be wajib and his
acts pertaining to the superiority prayers such as Salah on the occasion of lunar and solar eclipse s alat
al-khusuf wa al-kusuf) would be mandub.[36. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 274; Badran, Bayan , p. 41. ] Alternatively, the Sunnah  may
itself provide a clear indication as to whether a particular rule which it prescribes is wajib, mandub, or
merely permissible. Another method of ascertaining the value of a particular act is to draw an analogy
between an undefined act and an act or saying whose value is known. Additionally, the subject-matter
of the Sunnah may provide a sign or an indication as to its value.  With regard to prayers, for  example ,
the call to prayers, or adhan, and the call which immediately precedes the standing to congregational
prayer (i.e. the iqamah) are indications as to the obligatory nature of the prayer. For it is known from
the rules of Shari'ah that adhan and iqamah precede the obligatory Salah only. A salah which is not
obligatory such as the 'id prayer, or Salat al-istisqa' ('prayers offered at the time of drought'), are not
preceded by the preliminaries of adhan or iqamah. Another method of evaluating an act is by looking at
its opposite, that is, its absence. If it is concluded that the act in question would have been in the nature
of a prohibition had it not been authorized by the Prophet, then this would imply that it is obligatory.
For example, circumcision is evaluated to be an obligation. Since it consists essentially of the infliction
of injury for no obvious cause, had it not been made into an obligation, then it would presumably be
unlawful. Its validation by the Shari'ah, in other words, is taken as an indication of its wujub. This
explanation is basically applicable to all penalties that the Shari'ah has prescribed, although in most
cases the value of the prescribed punishment is understood from the direct rulings of the relevant texts.
And lastly, an act may require the belated performance (qada') of a wajib or a mandub, and as such its
value would correspond to that of its prompt performance ( ada').[37. Hitu, p. 275 ]The foregoing are the categories of acts whose direction and value can be ascertained. However, if no
such verification is possible, then one must look at the intention behind its enactment. If a Prophetic act

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 56is intended as a means of seeking the pleasure of God, then it is classified as mandub; and according to
a variant view, as wajib. However, if the intention behind a particular act could not be detected either,
then it is classified as wajib, and according to a variant view as mandub; but the matter is subject to
interpretation and ijtihad.[38. Hitu, p. 276.](b) All the rulings of Sunnah which originate from the Prophet in his capacity as imam or the Head of
State, such as allocations and expenditure of public funds, decisions pertaining to military strategy and
war, appointment of state officials, distribution of booty, signing of treaties, etc., partake in the legal
Sunnah which, however, does not constitute general legislation (tashri' 'amm). Sunnahs of this type may
not be practiced by individuals without obtaining the permission of the competent government
authorities first. The mere fact that the Prophet acted in a certain way, or said something relating to
these matters, does not bind individuals directly, and does not entitle them to act on their own initiative
without the express permission of the lawful authority.[39. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 513.] To give an example,
according to a Hadith 'whoever kills a warrior [in battle] may take his belongings'.[40. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 758,
Hadith no. 2715; Ibn Qayyim,  I'lam , II, 223.]The ulema have differed as to the precise import of this Hadith. According to one view, the Prophet
uttered this Hadith in his capacity as Imam, in which case no-one is entitled to the belongings of his
victim in the battlefield without the express authorization of the Imam. Others have held the view that
this Hadith lays down a general law which entitles the soldier to the belongings of the deceased even
without the permission of the Imam.[41. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 515.]It has been observed that the Prophet might have uttered this Hadith in order to encourage the
Companions to do jihad in the light of the then prevailing circumstances. The circumstances may have
been such that an incentive of this kind was required; or it may be that it was intended to lay down a
general law without any regard for particular situations. According to Imam Shafi'i, the Hadith under
consideration lays down a general rule of Shari'ah. For this is the general norm in regards to the
Sunnah. The main purpose of the Prophet's mission was to lay down the foundations of the Shari'ah,
and unless there is an indication to the contrary, one must assume that the purpose of the Hadith in
general is to lay down general law.[42. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 516.](c) Sunnah which originates from the Prophet in his capacity as a judge in particular disputes usually
consists of two parts: the part which relates to claims, evidence and factual proof and the judgment
which is issued as a result. The first part is situational and does not constitute general law, whereas the
second part lays down general law, with the proviso however, that it does not bind the individual
directly, and no-one may act upon it without the prior authorization of a competent judge. Since the
Prophet himself acted in a judicial capacity, the rules that he has enacted must therefore be
implemented by the office of the qadi.[43. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 36; Khallaf,  'Ilm, p. 44.] Hence when a person has a claim

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 57over another which the latter denies, but the claimant knows of a similar dispute which the Prophet has
adjudicated in a certain way, this would not entitle the claimant to take the law into his own hands. He
must follow proper procedures to prove his claim and to obtain a judicial decision.[44 Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 514. ]To distinguish the legal from non-legal Sunnah, it is necessary for the mujtahid to ascertain the original
purpose and context in which a particular ruling of the Sunnah has been issued and whether it was
designed to establish a general rule of law. The Hadith literature does not always provide clear
information as to the different capacities in which the Prophet might have acted in particular situations,
although the mujtahid may find indications that assist him to some extent. The absence of adequate
information and criteria on which to determine the circumstantial and non-legal Sunnah from that which
constitutes general law dates back to the time of the Companions. The difficulty has persisted ever
since, and it is due mainly to the shortage of adequate information that disagreement has arisen among
the ulema over the understanding and interpretation of the Sunnah .[45. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 51; Badran, Bayan , pp. 41-42;
Mutawalli, Mabadi' , p. 38.]To give another example, juristic disagreement has arisen concerning a Hadith on the reclamation of
barren land which reads, 'whoever reclaims barren land becomes its owner.[46. Abu Dawud, Sunan  (Hasan's trans.), II,
873, Hadith no. 3067; Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 889, Hadith no. 2945.]The ulema have differed as to whether the Prophet uttered this Hadith in his prophetic capacity or in his
capacity as head of state. If the former is established to be the case then the Hadith lays down a binding
rule of law. Anyone who reclaims barren land becomes its owner and need not obtain any permission
from the Imam or anyone else. For the Hadith would provide the necessary authority and there would
be no need for official permission. If on the other hand it is established that the Prophet uttered this
Hadith in his capacity as Imam, then it would imply that anyone who wishes to reclaim barren land
must obtain the prior permission of the lmam. The Hadith in other words, only entitles the lmam to
grant the citizen the right to reclaim barren land. The majority of jurists have adopted the first view
whereas the Hanafis have held the second. The majority of jurists, including Abu Hanifa’s disciple, Abu
Yusuf, have held that the consent of the State is not necessary for anyone to commence reclaiming
barren land. But it appears that jurists and scholars of the later ages prefer the Hanafi view which
stipulates that reclaiming barren land requires the consent of the State. The Hanafi view is based on the
rationale of preventing disputes among people. The Malikis on the other hand only require government
consent when the land is close to a human settlement, and the Hanbalis only when it has previously
been alienated by another person.[47. Abu Dawud, footnote 2534 at p. 873; Al-Marghinani, Hedaya  (Hamilton's trans.)' p. 610.]Disagreement has also arisen with regard to the Hadith that adjudicated the case of Hind, the wife of
Abu Sufyan. This woman complained to the Prophet that her husband was a tight-fisted man and that
despite his affluence, he refused to give adequate maintenance to her and her child. The Prophet

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 58instructed her to 'take [of her husband's property] what is sufficient for yourself and your child
according to custom. [48. Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 1000, Hadith no. 3342.]The ulema have disagreed as to whether the Prophet uttered this Hadith so as to enact a general rule of
law, or whether he was acting in the capacity of a judge. If it be admitted that the Hadith consists of a
judgment addressing a particular case, then it would only authorize the judge to issue a corresponding
order. Thus it would be unlawful for a creditor to take his entitlement from the property of his debtor
without a judicial order. If it be established, on the other hand, that the Hadith lays down a general rule
of law, then no adjudication would be required to entitle the wife or the creditor to the property of the
defaulting debtor. For the Hadith itself would provide the necessary authority. If any official permission
is to be required then it would have to be in the nature of a declaration or clearance only.[49. Shaltut, Al-Islam ,
p. 515.]The Hanafis, Shafis and Hanbalis have held that when a man who is able to support his wife willfully
refuses to do so, it is for the wife to take action and for the qadi to grant a judgment in her favor. If the
husband still refuses to fulfill his duty, the qadi may  order  the sale of his property from whose proceeds
the wife may obtain her maintenance. The court may even imprison a persistently neglectful husband.
The wife is, however, not entitled to a divorce, the reason being that when the Prophet instructed Hind
to take her maintenance from her husband's property, she was not granted the right to ask for a divorce.
The Malikis are basically in agreement with the majority view, with the only difference that in the event
of the husband's persistent refusal, the Malikis entitle the wife to ask for a divorce. Notwithstanding
some disagreement as to whether the court should determine the quantity of maintenance on the basis of
the financial status of the husband, the wife, or both, according to the majority view, the husband's
standards of living should be the basis of the court decision. Thus the ulema have generally considered
the Hadith under consideration to consist of a judicial decision of the Prophet, and as such it only
authorizes the judge to adjudicate the wife's complaint and to specify the quantity of maintenance and
the method of its payment. [50. Al-Khatib, Mughni al-Muhtaj , III, 442; Din, Al-Nafaqah , pp. 20-23. ]Sunnah which consists of general legislation often has the quality of permanence and universal
application to all Muslims. Sunnah of this type usually consists of commands and prohibitions which
are related to the Qur'an in the sense of endorsing, elaborating or qualifying the general provisions of
the Holy Book. [51. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 516.]Qur'an and Sunnah Distinguished

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 59The Qur’an was recorded in writing from beginning to end during the lifetime of the Prophet, who
ascertained that the Qur'an was preserved as he received it through divine revelation. The Prophet
clearly expressed the concern that nothing of his own Sunnah should be confused with the text of the
Qur'an. This was, in fact, the main reason why he discouraged his Companions, at the early stage of his
mission in any case.' [52. The Prophet had initially ordered his Companions not to write anything other than the Qur'an from him. This was' however'
later amended and the Prophet permitted the writing of his Sunnah.  Badran ( Usul , pp. 83-84) refers to at least two instances where the Prophet allowed his
instructions to be reduced into writing.] from reducing the Sunnah into writing lest it be confused with the Qur'an. The
Sunnah on the other hand was mainly retained in memory by the Companions who did not, on the
whole, keep a written record of the teachings of the Prophet. There were perhaps some exceptions as
the relevant literature suggests that some, though a small number, of the Companions held collections
of the Hadith of the Prophet which they wrote and kept in their private collections. The overall
impression obtained is, however, that this was done on a fairly limited scale.
The Companions used to verify instances of doubt concerning the text of the Qur'an with the Prophet
himself, who would often clarify them through clear instruction. This manner of verification is,
however, unknown with regard to the Sunnah. [53. Shaltut, Al-Islam , p.511.]The entire text of the Qur'an has come down to us through continuous testimony (tawatur) whereas the
Sunnah has in the most part been narrated and transmitted in the form of solitary, or Ahad, reports. Only
a small portion of the Sunnah has been transmitted in the form of Mutawatir.
The Qur'an in none of its parts consists of conceptual transmission, that is, transmission in the words of
the narrator himself. Both the concepts and words of the Qur'an have been recorded and transmitted as
the Prophet received them. The Sunnah on the other hand consists, in the most part, of the transmission
of concepts in words and sentences that belong to the narrators. This is why one often finds that
different versions of the one and the same Hadith are reported by people whose understanding or
interpretation of a particular Hadith is not identical.
The scope of ikhtilaf, or disagreement, over the Sunnah is more extensive than that which may exist
regarding the Qur'an. Whereas the ulema have differed in their understanding/interpretation of the text
of the Qur'an, there is no problem to speak of concerning the authenticity of the contents of the Qur'an.
But disagreement over the Sunnah extends not only to questions of interpretation but also to
authenticity and proof, issues which we shall further elaborate as our discussion proceeds. [54. Shaltut, Al-
Islam , p. 512.]Priority of the Qur'an over the Sunnah

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 60As Sunnah is the second source of the Shari'ah next to the Qur'an, the mujtahid is bound to observe an
order of priority between the Qur'an and Sunnah. Hence in his search for a solution to a particular
problem, the jurist must resort to the Sunnah only when he fails to find any guidance in the Qur'an.
Should there be a clear text in the Qur'an, it must be followed and be given priority over any ruling of
the Sunnah which may happen to be in conflict with the Qur'an. The priority of the Qur'an over the
Sunnah is partly a result of the fact that the Qur'an consists wholly of manifest revelation (wahy zahir)
whereas the Sunnah mainly consists of internal revelation (wahy batin) and is largely transmitted in the
words of the narrators themselves. The other reason for this order of priority relates to the question of
authenticity. The authenticity of the Qur'an is not open to doubt, it is, in other words, qati, or decisive,
in respect of authenticity and must therefore take priority over the Sunnah, or at least that part of
Sunnah which is speculative (zanni) in respect of authenticity. The third point in favor of establishing
an order of priority between the Qur'an and the Sunnah is that the latter is explanatory to the former.
Explanation or commentary should naturally occupy a secondary place in relationship to the source.[55.
Cf. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 3; Badran, Usul, p. 101.] Furthermore, the order of priority between the Qur'an and Sunnah is
clearly established in the Hadith of Mu'adh b. Jabal which has already been quoted. The purport of this
Hadith was also adopted and communicated in writing by 'Umar b. al-Kattab to two judges, Shurayh b.
Harith and Abu Musa al-Ash'ari, who were ordered to resort to the Qur'an first and to the Sunnah only
when they could find no guidance in the Qur'an.[56. Shatibi, IV, 4; Siba'i, Sunnah , p. 377; Badran, Usul , p. 82. Shatibi adds that two
other prominent Companions, 'Abd Allah b. Mas'ud, and 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas are on record as having confirmed the priority of the Qur'an over the Sunnah  ]A practical consequence of this order of priority may be seen in the Hanafi distinction between fard and
wajib. The former is founded in the definitive authority of the Qur'an, whereas the latter is founded in
the definitive Sunnah, but is one degree weaker because of a possible doubt in its transmission and
accuracy of content. These are some of the factors which would explain the general agreement of the
ulema to the effect that the authority of Qur'an overrides that of the Sunnah.[57. Shatibi, IV, 4.]There should in principle be no conflict between the Qur'an and the authentic Sunnah. If, however, a
conflict is seen to exist between them, they must be reconciled as far as possible and both should be
retained. If this is not possible, the Sunnah in question is likely to be of doubtful authenticity and must
therefore give way to the Qur’an. No genuine conflict is known to exist between the Mutawatir  Hadith
and the Qur'an. All instances of conflict between the Sunnah and the Qur'an, in fact, originate in the
solitary, or Ahad, Hadith, which is in any case of doubtful authenticity and subordinate to the overriding
authority of the Qur'an .[58. Cf. Badran, Usul , p. 102.]It has, however, been suggested that establishing such an order of priority is anomalous and contrary to
the basic role that the Sunnah plays in relation to the Qur'an. As the familiar Arabic phrase, al-Sunnah
qadiyah 'ala al-kitab (Sunnah is the arbiter of the Qur'an) suggests, it is normally the Sunnah which
explains the Qur’an, not vice versa. The fact that the Sunnah explains and determines the precise
meaning of the Qur’an means that the Qur'an is more dependent on the Sunnah than the Sunnah is on

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 61the Qur’an.[59. While quoting Awza'i on this point, Shawkani ( Irshad , p. 33) concurs with the view that the Sunnah is an independent source of Shari'ah ,
and not necessarily, as it were, a commentary on the Qur'an only See also Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 4.] In the event, for example, where the
text of the Qur'an imparts more than one meaning or when it is conveyed in general terms, it is the
Sunnah which specifies the meaning that must prevail. Again, the manifest (Zahir) of the Qur'an may be
abandoned by the authority of the Sunnah, just as the Sunnah may qualify the absolute (mutlaq) in the
Qur'an. The Qur'an on the other hand does not play the same role with regard to the Sunnah. It is not the
declared purpose of the Qur'an to explain or clarify the Sunnah, as this was done by the Prophet
himself. Since the Sunnah explains, qualifies, and determines the purport of the Qur'an, it must take
priority over the Qur'an. If this is admitted, it would follow that incidents of conflict between the Qur'an
and Sunnah must be resolved in favor of the latter. Some ulema have even advanced the view that the
Hadith of Mu'adh b. Jabal (which clearly confirms the Qur'an's priority over the Sunnah ) is anomalous
in that not everything in the Qur'an is given priority over the Sunnah.[60. See Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 5.] For one
thing, the Mutawatir Hadith stands on the same footing as the Qur'an itself. Likewise, the manifest
(Zahir) of the Qur'an is open to interpretation and ijtihad in the same way as the solitary, or Ahad,
Hadith; which means that they are more or less equal in these respects. Furthermore, according to the
majority opinion, before implementing a Qur'anic rule one must resort to the Sunnah and ascertain that
the ruling in question has not been qualified in any way or given an interpretation on which the text of
the Qur'an is not self-evident.[61. See Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 5., see also Siba`i, Al-Sunnah, pp. 378-79.]In response to the assertion that the Sunnah is the arbiter of the Qur'an, it will be noted, as al-Shatibi
points out, that this need not interfere with the order of priority in favor of the Qur'an. For in all cases
where the Sunnah specifies or qualifies the general or the absolute terms of the Qur'an, the Sunnah in
effect explains and interprets the Qur'an. In none of such instances is the Qur'an abandoned in favor of
the Sunnah. The word qadiyah (arbiter) in the expression quoted above therefore means mubayyinah
(explanatory) and does not imply the priority of the Sunnah over the Qur'an. The textual rulings of the
Qur’an concerning theft and the obligation of zakah have, for example, been qualified by the Sunnah.
However, it is only proper to say that in both these cases, the Sunnah elaborates the general rulings of
the Qur'an, and it would hardly be accurate to suggest that the Sunnah has introduced anything new or
that it seeks to overrule the Qur'an. When an interpreter explains a particular legal text to us, it would
hardly be correct to say that we act upon the words of the interpreter without referring to the legal text
itself.[62. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 5.]Furthermore, the explanatory role of the Sunnah in relationship to the Qur'an has been determined by
the Qur'an itself, where we read in an address to the Prophet in sura al-Nahl (16:44):  'We have sent
down to you the Remembrance so that you may explain to the people what has been revealed to them.'
The correct conclusion drawn from this and similar Qur'anic passages is that the Sunnah, being
explanatory to the Qur'an, is subordinate to it.[63. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 6.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 62Is Sunnah an Independent Source?An adequate answer to the question as to whether the Sunnah is a mere supplement to the Qur'an or a
source in its own right necessitates an elaboration of the relationship of the Sunnah to the Qur'an in the
following three capacities:
Firstly, the Sunnah may consist of rules that merely confirm and reiterate the Qur’an, in which case the
rules concerned originate in the Qur'an and are merely corroborated by the Sunnah. The question as to
whether the Sunnah is an independent source is basically redundant with regard to matters on which the
Sunnah merely confirms the Qur'an, as it is obvious that in such cases the Sunnah is not an independent
source. A substantial part of the Sunnah is, in fact, of this variety: all ahadith pertaining to the five
pillars of the faith and other such matters like the rights of one's parents, respect for the property of
others, and ahadith which regulate homicide, theft and false testimony, etc., basically reaffirm the
Qur'anic principles on these subjects.[64. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 379; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 39; Badran, Usul , p. 102.] To be more
specific, the Hadith that "it is unlawful to take the property of a Muslim without his express consent, [65.
Bayhaqi, Al-Sunan al-Kubra', III, 10. ] merely confirms the Qur'anic ayah which orders the Muslims to "devour not
each other's properties unlawfully unless it is through trade by your consent (al-Nisa, 4:19). The origin
of this rule is Qur'anic, and since the foregoing Hadith merely reaffirms the Qur’an, there is no room for
saying that it constitutes an independent authority in its own right.
Secondly, the Sunnah may consist of an explanation or clarification to the Qur’an; it may clarify the
ambivalent (mujmal) of the Qur’an, qualify its absolute statements, or specify the general terms of the
Qur'an. This is once again the proper role that the Sunnah plays in relationship to the Qur’an: it explains
it. Once again a substantial part of the Sunnah falls under this category. It is, for example, through this
type of Sunnah that Qur'anic expressions like salah, zakah, hajj and riba, etc., have acquired their
juridical (shari') meanings. To give another example, with regard to the contract of sale the Qur'an
merely declares sale to be lawful as opposed to riba, which is forbidden. This general principle has later
been elaborated by the Sunnah which expounded the detailed rules of Shari'ah concerning sale,
including its conditions, varieties, and sales which might amount to riba. The same could be said of the
lawful and unlawful varieties of food, a subject on which the Qur'an contains only general guidelines
while the Sunnah provides the details. [66. Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , II, 238; Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 380; Badran, Usul , pp. 103-105.] Again, on
the subject of bequest, the Qur'an provides for the basic legality of bequest and the rule that it must be
implemented prior to the distribution of the estate among the heirs (al-Nisa', 4:12). The Sunnah
supplements these principles by enacting additional rules which facilitate a proper implementation of
the general principles of the Qur'an.[67. Badran, Bayan , p. 6.]The foregoing two varieties of Sunnah between them comprise the largest bulk of Sunnah, and the
ulema are in agreement that these two types of Sunnah are integral to the Qur'an and constitute a logical

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 63whole with it. The two cannot be separated or taken independently from one another. It is considered
that the Sunnah which qualifies or elaborates the general provisions of the Qur'an on devotional matters
(ibadat), on the punishment of theft, on the duty of zakat, and on the subject of bequest, could only
have originated in divine inspiration (ilham), for these cannot be determined by means of rationality and
ijtihad alone. [68. Badran, Bayan , p. 7.]Thirdly, the Sunnah may consist of rulings on which the Qur'an is silent, in which case the ruling in
question originates in the Sunnah itself. This variety of Sunnah, referred to as al-Sunnah al-muassisah,
or 'founding Sunnah', neither confirms nor opposes the Qur'an, and its contents cannot be traced back to
the Holy Book. It is only this variety of Sunnah which lies in the centre of the debate as to whether the
Sunnah is an independent source of law. To give some examples: the prohibition regarding
simultaneous marriage to the maternal and paternal aunt of one's wife (often referred to as 'unlawful
conjunction'), the right of pre-emption ( shuf'), the grandmother's entitlement to a share in inheritance,
the punishment of rajm, that is, death by stoning for adultery when committed by a married Muslim -
all originate in the Sunnah as the Qur'an itself is silent on these matters. [69. Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , II, 233; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.
40; Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 380.]There is some disagreement among jurists as to whether the Sunnah, or this last variety of it at any rate,
constitutes an independent source of Shari'ah. Some ulema of the later ages (al-muta’akhkhirun),
including al-Shatibi and al-Shawkani, have held the view that the Sunnah is an independent source.[70. Cf.
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 33; Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 380.] They have further maintained that the Qur'anic ayah in sura al-Nahl
(16:44 - quoted above) is inconclusive and that despite its being clear on the point that the Prophet
interprets the Qur'an it does not overrule the recognition of the Sunnah as an independent source. On the
contrary, it is argued that there is evidence in the Qur'an which substantiates the independent status of
Sunnah. The Qur'an, for example, in more than one place requires the believers to 'obey God and obey
His Messenger, (al-Nisa. 4:58; 4:80; al-Ma'idah, 5:92). The fact that obedience to the Prophet is
specifically enjoined next to obeying God warrants the conclusion that obedience to the Prophet means
obeying him whenever he orders or prohibits something on which the Qur'an might be silent. For if the
purpose of obedience to the Prophet were to obey him only when he explained the Qur'an, then 'obey
God' would be sufficient and there would have been no need to add the phrase 'obey the Messenger'.[71.
Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 7.] Elsewhere the Qur'an clearly places submission and obedience to the Prophet at the
very heart of the faith as a test of one's acceptance of Islam. This is the purport of the ayah which reads:
'By thy Lord, they will not believe till they make thee the judge regarding disagreements between them,
and find in themselves no resistance against the verdict, but accept it in full submission' (al-Nisa, 4:65).
Furthermore, the proponents of the independent status of the Sunnah have quoted the Hadith of Mu'adh
b. Jabal in support of their argument. The Hadith is clear on the point that the Sunnah is authoritative in
cases on which no guidance can be found in the Qur'an. The Sunnah, in other words, stands on its own
feet regardless of whether it is substantiated by the Qur'an or not .[72. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 8; Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 383. ]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 64According to the majority of ulema, however, the Sunnah, in all its parts, even when it enacts original
legislation, is explanatory and integral to the Qur'an.[73. Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 82.] Al-Shafi'i's views on this
matter are representative of the majority position. In his Risalah, al-Shafi'i' states:
I do not know anyone among the ulema to oppose [the doctrine] that the Sunnah of the Prophet is of
three types: first is the Sunnah which prescribes the like of what God has revealed in His Book; next is
the Sunnah which explains the general principles of the Qur'an and clarifies the will of God; and last is
the Sunnah where the Messenger of God has ruled on matters on which nothing can be found in the
Book of God. The first two varieties are integral to the Qur'an, but the ulema have differed as to the
third.[74. Shafi'i, Risalah , pp. 52-53.]Al-Shafi'i goes on to explain the views that the ulema have advanced concerning the relationship of
Sunnah to the Qur'an. One of these views, which receives strong support from al-Shafi'i himself, is that
God has explicitly rendered obedience to the Prophet an obligatory duty ( fard). In his capacity as
Messenger of God, the Prophet has introduced laws some of which originate in the Qur'an while others
do not. But all Prophetic legislation emanates in divine authority. The Sunnah and the Qur'an are of the
same provenance, and all must be upheld and obeyed. Others have held the view that the Prophetic
mission itself, that is the fact that the Prophet is the chosen Messenger of God, is sufficient proof for the
authority of the Sunnah. For it is through the Sunnah that the Prophet fulfilled his divine mission.
According to yet another view there is no Sunnah whose origin cannot be traced back to the Qur'an.
This view maintains that even the Sunnah which explains the number and content of s alah and the
quantities of zakah as well as the lawful and forbidden varieties of food and trade merely elaborates
general principles of the Qur'an. [75. Shafi'i, Risalah , pp. 52-53.] More specifically, all the ahadith which provide
details on the lawful and unlawful varieties of food merely elaborate the Qur'anic declaration that God
has permitted wholesome food and prohibited that which is unclean (al-A'raf: 7:157) . [76. Cf. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p.
388.]The majority view, which seeks to establish an almost total identity between the Sunnah and the Qur'an,
further refers to the saying of the Prophet's widow, 'A'ishah, when she attempted to interpret the
Qur'anic epithet wa innaka la 'ala khuluqin 'azim ('and you possess an excellent character') (al-Qalam,
68:4). 'A'ishah is quoted to have said that 'his (the Prophet's) khuluq was the Qur'an'. Khuluq in this
context means the conduct of the Prophet, his acts, sayings, and all that he has approved. Thus it is
concluded that the Sunnah is not separate from the Qur'an. [77. Qurtubi,  Tafsir , XVIII, 227.]Furthermore, the majority view seeks to establish an identity between the general objectives of the
Qur'an and Sunnah: The Sunnah and the Qur'an are unanimous in their pursuit of the three-fold
objectives of protecting the necessities ( daruriyyat ), complementary requirements ( hajiyyat ) and the
'embellishments' ( tahsiniyyat ). [78. For further discussion see Chapter xiii on maslahah mursalah . ] It is then argued that even
when the Sunnah broaches new ground, it is with the purpose of giving effect to one or the other of the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 65objectives that have been validated in the Qur'an. Thus the identity between the Qur'an and Sunnah is
transferred, from one of theme and subject, to that of the main purpose and spirit that is common to
both. [79. Cf. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 388-90.]And finally, the majority explain that some of the rulings of the Sunnah consist of an analogy to the
Qur'an. For example, the Qur'an has decreed that no one may marry two sisters simultaneously. The
Hadith (cited below on page 71) which prohibits simultaneous marriage to the maternal and paternal
aunt of one's wife is based on the same effective cause ( 'illah ), which is to avoid the severance of close
ties of kinship ( qat' al-arham ). In short, the Sunnah as a whole is no more than a supplement to the
Qur'an. The Qur'an is indeed more than comprehensive and provides complete guidance on the broad
outline of the entire body of the Shari'ah. [80. Cf. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 388-90.]In conclusion, it may be said that both sides are essentially in agreement on the authority of Sunnah as a
source of law and its principal role in relationship to the Qur'an. They both acknowledge that the
Sunnah contains legislation which is not found in the Qur'an.[81. Cf. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah ,, p. 385 ] The difference
between them seems to be one of interpretation rather than substance. The Qur'anic ayat on the duty of
obedience to the Prophet, and those which assign to him the role of the interpreter of the Qur'an, are
open to variant interpretations. These passages have been quoted in support of both the views, that the
Sunnah is supplementary to the Qur'an, and that it is an independent source. The point which is basic to
both these views is the authority of the Prophet and the duty of adherence to his Sunnah. In the
meantime, both sides acknowledge the fact that the Sunnah contains legislation which is additional to
the Qur'an. When this is recognised, the rest of the debate becomes largely redundant. For what else is
there to be achieved by the argument that the Sunnah is an independent source? The partisans of the two
views have, in effect, resolved their differences without perhaps declaring this to be the case. Since the
Qur'an provides ample evidence to the effect that the Prophet explains the Qur'an and that he must be
obeyed, there is no need to advance a theoretical conflict between the two facets of a basic unity. Both
views can be admitted without the risk of running into a logical contradiction. The two views should
therefore be seen not as contradictory but as logical extensions of one another.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 66Distortion and ForgeryThere is no dispute over the occurrence of extensive forgery in the Hadith literature. The ulema of
Hadith are unanimous on this, and some have gone so far as to affirm that in no other branch of Islamic
sciences has there been so much forgery as in the Hadith. The very existence of a bulk of literature and
works by prominent ulema bearing the title al-Mawdu'at, or 'fabricated Hadith', bears witness to
extensive forgery in this area. [82. Cf. Shabir,  Authority of Hadith , p. 50.]There is some disagreement over determining the historical origins of forgery in Hadith. While some
observers have given the caliphate of 'Uthman as a starting point, others have dated it a little later, at
around the year 40 Hijrah, when political differences between the fourth caliph, 'Ali, and Mu'awiyah led
to military confrontation and the division of the Muslims into various factions. According to a third
view, forgery in Hadith started even earlier, that is, during the caliphate of Abu Bakr when he waged
the War of Apostasy (riddah) against the refusers of zakah. But the year 40 is considered the more
likely starting point for the development of serious and persistent differences in the community, which
is marked by the emergence of the Kharijites and the Shi'ah. Muslims were thenceforth divided, and
hostility between them acquired a religious dimension when they began to use the Qur'an and Sunnah in
support of their claims. When the misguided elements among them failed to find any authority in the
sources for their views, they either imposed a distorted interpretation on the source materials, or
embarked on outright fabrication.[83. Siba'i,  Al-Sunnah , p. 75; Shabir, Authority of Hadith , p. 51.]The attribution of false statements to the Prophet may be divided into two types: (1) deliberate forgery,
which is usually referred to as hadith mawdu' ; (2) unintentional fabrication, which is known as hadith
batil and is due mainly to error and recklessness in reporting. For example, in certain cases it is noted
that the chain of narrators ended with a Companion or a Successor only but the transmitter instead
extended it directly to the Prophet. The result is all the same, and fabrication whether deliberate or
otherwise must in all cases be abandoned .[84. Azami, Studies,  pp. 68-70; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 292. ] Our present discussion is,
however, mainly concerned with deliberate fabrication in Hadith.
The initial forgery in Hadith is believed to have occurred in the context of personality cult literature
(fada'il al-ashkhas ) which aimed at crediting (or discrediting) leading political figures with exaggerated
claims. The earliest forgery in this context, according to the Sunnis, was committed by the Shi'ah. This
is illustrated by the Hadith of Ghadir Khumm in which the Prophet is quoted to have said that "Ali is
my brother, executor and successor. Listen to him and obey him'. A similar statement attributed to the
Prophet is as follows: 'Whoever wishes to behold Adam for his knowledge, Noah for his piety, Ibrahim

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 67for his gentleness, Moses for his commanding presence and Jesus for his devotion to worship - let him
behold 'Ali. [85. For details see Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , pp. 76-80; Azami, Studies, pp.68-73.]There are numerous fabricated ahadith condemning Mu'awiyah, including, for example, the one in
which the Prophet is quoted to have ordered the Muslims, 'When you see Mu'awiyah on my pulpit, kill
him.' The fanatic supporters of Mu'awiyah and the Umayyad dynasty are, on the other hand, known to
have fabricated Hadith such as 'The trusted ones are three: I, Gabriel and Mu'awiyah. [86. Siba'i, p. 81.]The Kharijites are on the whole considered to have avoided fabricating Hadith, which is due mainly to
their belief that the perpetrator of a grave sin is no longer a Muslim. Since they saw the fabrication of
Hadith in this light, they avoided indulgence in forgery as a matter of principle and a requirement of
their doctrine. [87. Siba'i, p. 82.]A group of heretic factions known as al-Zanadiqah (pl. of Zindiq ), owing to their hatred of Islam,
fabricated Hadith which discredited Islam in the view of its followers. Included among such are:
'eggplants are cure for every illness'; and 'beholding a good-looking face is a form of 'ibadah'. It is
reported that just before his execution, one of the notorious fabricators of Hadith, 'Abd al-Karim b. Abu
al-'Awja', confessed that he had fabricated 4,000 ahadith in which halal was rendered haram and haram
was rendered halal. It has been further reported that the Zanadiqah fabricated a total of 14,000
ahadith,[88. Siba'i, pp. 84-85; Azami, Studies , p. 68; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 290.] a report which may or may not be credible. For a
statement of this nature tends to arouse suspicion as to its veracity: even in fabricated matters, it is not a
facile task to invent such a vast number of Hadith on the subject of halal and haram. Could it be that
exaggerated figures of this order were quote mainly for their subversive value?
Racial, tribal and linguistic fanaticism was yet another context in which Hadith were fabricated. Note
for example the following: 'When ever God was angry, He sent down revelation in Arabic, but when
contented, He chose Persian for this purpose.' The Arab fanatic too has matched this anathema by
claiming that 'Whenever God was angry he sent down revelation in Persian, but when contented He
chose to speak in Arabic. [89. For these and more examples see Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 85ff. ] These and other similar forgeries
relating to the virtues of superiority of certain tribes, cities, and periods of time over others have been
isolated by the ulema of Hadith and placed in the category of al-Mawdu'at . [90. Note e.g. Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's (d. 911
A.H.) Al-La'ali al-Masnu'ah fi al-Ahadith al-Mawdu'ah; Shaykh 'Ali al-Qari al-Hanafi (d. 1014), Al-Mawdu'at al-Kabir , and Yahya b. 'Ali al-Shawkani (d. 1250),
Al-Fawa'id al-Majmu'ah fi'l-Ahadith al-Mawdu'ah.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 68Known among the classes of forgers are also professional story-teller and preachers ( al-qussas wa'l-
wa'izun ), whose urge for popularity through arousing an emotional response in their audience led them
to indulge in forgery. They made up stories and attributed them to the Prophet. It is reported that once a
story-teller cited a Hadith to an audience in the mosque on the authority of Ahmad b. Hanbal and Yahya
b. Ma'in which runs as follows: 'Whoever says 'there is no God but Allah', Allah will reward him, for
each word uttered, with a bird in Paradise, with a beak of gold and feathers of pearls.' At the end of his
sermon, the speaker was confronted by Ahmad b. Hanbal and Yahya b Ma'in who were present on the
occasion and told the speaker that they had never related any Hadith of this kind.[91. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , pp. 86-87;
Azami, Studies , p. 69; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 291.]Juristic and theological differences constitute another theme of forgery in Hadith. This is illustrated by
the following statement attributed to the Prophet: 'Whoever raises his hands during the performance of
salah, his salah is null and void.' In yet another statement, we read: 'Whoever says that the Qur'an is the
created speech of God becomes an infidel [...] and his wife stands divorced from him as of that
moment.'
Another category of fabricated Hadith is associated with the religious zeal of individuals whose
devotion to Islam led them to the careless ascription of Hadith to the Prophet. This is illustrated by the
forgeries committed by one Nuh b. Abu Maryam on the virtues of the various suras of the Qur'an. He is
said to have later regretted what he did and explained that he fabricated such Hadith because he saw
people who were turning away from the Qur'an and occupying themselves with the fiqh of Abu Hanifah
and the battle stories of Muhammad b. Ishaq. Numerous other names occur in the relevant literature,
including those of Ghulam Khalil and Ibn Abi 'Ayyash of Baghdad, who were both known as pious
individuals, but who invented Hadith on the virtues of certain words of praise ( adhkar wa-awrad ) and
other devotional matters. [92. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , pp. 86-87; Azami, Studies , p. 69; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 291. ]Without wishing to go into details, other themes on which Hadith forgery has taken place included the
urge on the part of courtiers who distorted an existing Hadith so as to please and flatter their overlords.
Similarly, the desire to establish the permissibility or virtue of certain varieties of food, beverages,
clothes and customary practices led individuals to introduce exaggerations and arbitrary changes in the
Hadith. [93. See for details Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 88; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 291. ]Classification and Value: II

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 69From the viewpoint of the continuity and completeness of their chains of transmitters, the Hadith are
once again classified into two categories: continuous ( muttasil ) and discontinued ( ghayr muttasil ). A
continuous Hadith is one which has a complete chain of transmission from the last narrator all the way
back to the prophet. A discontinued Hadith, also known as Mursal, is a Hadith whose chain of
transmitters is broken and incomplete. The majority of ulema have divided the continuous Hadith into
the two main varieties of Mutawatir and Ahad. To this the Hanafis have added an intermediate
category, namely the 'well-known', or  Mashhur.I. The Continuous Hadith
1. The MutawatirLiterally, Mutawatir means 'continuously recurrent'. In the present context, it means a report by an
indefinite number of people related in such a way as to preclude the possibility of their agreement to
perpetuate a lie. Such a possibility is inconceivable owing to their large number, diversity of residence,
and reliability.[94 Shawkani, Irshad, p. 46; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 84; Mahmassani, Falsafah (Ziadeh's trans.), p. 74.] A report would not be
called Mutawatir if its contents were believed on other grounds, such as the rationality of its content, or
that it is deemed to be a matter of axiomatic knowledge. [95 Khudari, Usul, p. 214; Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories, p. 40.] A
report is classified as Mutawatir only when it fulfills the following conditions:
a. The number of reporters in every period or generation must be large enough to preclude their
collusion in propagating falsehood. Should the number of reporters in any period fall short of a
reliable multitude, their report does not establish positive knowledge and is therefore not
Mutawatir.[96. Shawkani, Irshad, p. 47; Hitu, Wajiz, p. 294 ] Some ulema have attempted to specify a minimum,
varying from as low as four to as many as twenty, forty and seventy up into the hundreds. All of
these figures are based on analogies: the requirement of four is based on the similar number of
witnesses which constitute legal proof; twenty is analogous to the Qur'anic ayah in sura al-
Anfal (8:65) which reads: 'If there are twenty steadfast men among you, they will overcome two
hundred [fighters].' The next number, that is seventy, represents an analogy to another
Qur'anic passage where we read that 'Moses chose seventy men among his people for an
appointment with Us' (al-A'raf, 7:155). Some have drawn an analogy from the number of
participants in the battle of Badr. However, al-Ghazali is representative of the majority opinion
when he observes that all of these analogies are arbitrary and have no bearing on the point.
For certainty is not necessarily a question of numbers; it is corroborative evidence, the
knowledge and trustworthiness of reporters, that must be credited even in cases where the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 70actual number of reporters is not very large. [97. Ghazali, Mustasfa, I, 88; Shawkani, Irshad, p. 47; Hitu, Wajiz, p. 295.]Thus when a reasonable number of persons report something which is supported by other
evidence, their report may amount to positive knowledge.[98. Ghazali (Mustasfa), I, 87-88) illustrates this as follows:
supposing that five or six persons report the death of another, this does not amount to certainty, but when this is confirmed by seeing the father of the
deceased coming out of the house while obviously grief-stricken and exhibiting signs of disturbance that are unusual for a man of his stature, then the
two combined amount to positive knowledge. ] 
b. The reporters must base their report on sense perception. If, therefore, a large number of
people report that the universe is created, their report would not be Mutawatir. The report must
also be based on certain knowledge, not mere speculation. If, for example, the people of
Islamabad inform us of a person they thought was Zayd, or a bird they thought was a pigeon,
neither would amount to certainty. [99. Ghazali, Mustasfa, I, 86; Khudari, Usul, p. 214.] 
c. Some ulema have advanced the view that the reporters must be upright persons ('udul), which
means that they must neither be infidels nor profligates (kuffar wa-fussaq). The correct view,
however, is that neither of these conditions are necessary. What is essential in Mutawatir is the
attainment of certainty, and this can be obtained through the reports of non-Muslims,
profligates and even children who have reached the age of discernment, that is, between seven
and fifteen. The position is, of course, entirely different with regard to solitary Hadith, which
will be discussed later. [100. Shawkani, Irshad, p.48; Hitu, Wajiz, p.295. ] 
d. That the reporters are not biased in their cause and are not associated with one another
through a political or sectarian movement. And finally, all of these conditions must be met from
the origin of the report to the very end. [101. Ghazali, Mustasfa, I, 86; Shawkani, Irshad, p.48.]What is the value ( hukm ) of the Mutawatir ? According to the majority of ulema, the authority of a
Mutawatir Hadith is equivalent to that of the Qur'an. Universal continuous testimony ( tawatur )
engenders certainty ( yaqin ) and the knowledge that it creates is equivalent to knowledge that is acquired
through sense-perception. Most people, it is said, know their forefathers by means of Mutawatir reports
just as they know their children through sense-perception. Similarly, no one is likely to deny that
Baghdad was the seat of the caliphate for centuries, despite their lack of direct knowledge to that effect.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 71When the reports of a large number of the transmitters of Hadith concur in their purport but differ in
wording or in form, only their common meaning is considered Mutawatir. This is called Mutawatir bi'l-
ma'na, or conceptual Mutawatir. Examples of this kind of Mutawatir are numerous in the Hadith. Thus
the verbal and actual Sunnah which explain the manner of performing the obligatory prayers, the rituals
of hajj, fasting, the quantities of zakah, rules relating to retaliation ( qiyas ) and the implementation of
hudud, etc., all constitute conceptual Mutawatir. For a large number of the Companions witnessed the
acts and sayings of the Prophet on these matters, and their reports have been transmitted by multitudes
of people throughout the ages.[102. Isnawi, Nihayah, II, 185; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 84; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 41.] The other variety of
Mutawatir, which is of rare occurrence compared to the conceptual Mutawatir, is called Mutawatir bi'l-
lafz, or verbal Mutawatir. In this type of Mutawatir, all the reports must be identical on the exact
wording of the Hadith as they were uttered by the Prophet himself. For example the Hadith which
reads: 'Whoever lies about me deliberately must prepare himself for a place in Hell-fire.' [103. Abu Dawud,
Sunan (Hasan's trans.), III, 1036, Hadith no. 3643.]
The exact number of the verbal mutawatir is a subject of disagreement, but it is suggested that it does
not exceed ten ahadith. [104. Badran, Usul , p. 78.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 72. The Mashhur (Well-Known) HadithThe Mashhur is defined as a Hadith which is originally reported by one, two or more Companions from
the Prophet or from another Companion but has later become well-known and transmitted by an
indefinite number of people. It is necessary that the diffusion of the report should have taken place
during the first or the second generation following the demise of the Prophet, not later. This would
mean that the Hadith became widely known during the period of the Companions or the Successors. For
it is argued that after this period, all the Hadith became well-known, in which case there will be no
grounds for distinguishing the Mashhur from the general body of Hadith.[105. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 84; Aghnides,
Muhammadan Theories , p. 44. Shawkani's ( Irshad , p. 49) definition of Mashhur, however, includes ahadith  which became well-known as late as the second or
even the third century Hijrah.]For Abu Hanifah and his disciples, the Mashhur Hadith imparts positive knowledge, albeit of a lesser
degree of certainty than Mutawatir. But the majority of non-Hanafi jurists consider Mashhur to be
included in the category of solitary Hadith, and that it engenders speculative knowledge only.
According to the Hanafis, acting upon the Mashhur is obligatory but its denial does not amount to
disbelief.[106. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 84; Badran, Usul , p. 85.] The difference between the Mutawatir and Mashhur lies
mainly in the fact that every link in the chain of transmitters of the Mutawatir consists of a plurality of
reporters, whereas the first link in the case of Mashhur consists of one or two Companions only. As for
the remaining links in the chain of transmitters, there is no difference between the Mutawatir and
Mashhur. Examples of the Mashhur Hadith are those which are reported from the Prophet by a
prominent companion and then transmitted by a large number of narrators whose agreement upon a lie
is inconceivable. [107. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 41.] The Mashhur, according to the Hanafis, may qualify the 'general' of
the Qur'an. Two such ahadith which have so qualified the Qur'an are as follows: 'The killer shall not
inherit',
is a Mashhur Hadith which qualifies the general provisions of the Qur'an on inheritance in sura al-Nisa'
(4:11). Similarly the Mashhur Hadith which provides: 'No woman shall be married simultaneously with
her paternal or maternal aunt . . .'
has qualified the general provisions of the Qur'an on marriage where the text spells out the prohibited
degrees of marriage and then declares 'it is lawful for you to marry outside these prohibitions' (al-Nisa',
4:24). [108. Darimi, Sunan , Kitab al-fara'id, II, 384; Ibn Majah, Sunan , II, 913, Hadith no. 2735; Muslim, Sahih , p. 212; Hadith no. 817; Badran, Usul , p. 85.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 73The list of prohibitions provided in this ayah does not include simultaneous marriage with the maternal
or paternal aunt of one's wife; this is supplied by the Hadith.3. The Ahad (Solitary Hadith)The Ahad, or solitary Hadith (also known as Khabar al-Wahid), is a Hadith which is reported by a
single person or by odd individuals from the Prophet. Imam Shafi'i refers to it as Khabar al-Khassah,
which applies to every report narrated by one, two or more persons from the Prophet but which fails to
fulfill the requirements of either the Mutawatir or the Mashhur.[109. Shafi'i, Risalah, p.159ff; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p.84;
Mahmassani, Falsafah, p.74.] It is a Hadith which does not impart positive knowledge on its own unless it is
supported by extraneous or circumstantial evidence. This is the view of the majority, but according to
Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal and others, Ahad can engender positive knowledge.[110. Shawkani, Irshad, pp. 48-49.]Some ulema have rejected it on the basis of an analogy they have drawn with a provision of the law of
evidence, namely that the testimony of one witness falls short of legal proof. Those who
unquestioningly accept the authority of Ahad, such as the Zahiri school, maintain that when the Prophet
wanted to deliver a ruling in regard to a particular matter he did not invite all the citizens of Madinah to
attend. The majority of jurists, however, agree that Ahad may establish a rule of law provided that it is
related by a reliable narrator and the contents of the report are not repugnant to reason.[111. Amidi, Ihkam, I, 161;
Mahmassani, Falsafah, p. 74.] Many ulema have held that Ahad engenders speculative knowledge acting upon
which is preferable only. In the event where other supportive evidence can be found in its favour or
when there is nothing to oppose its contents, then acting upon Ahad is obligatory.[112. Shawkani, Irshad, p. 47; Abu
Zahrah, Usul, p. 85.] But Ahad may not, according to the majority of ulema, be relied upon as the basis of
belief (aqidah). For matters of belief must be founded in certainty even if a conjecture (zann) may at
time seem preferable.[113. Abu Zahrah, Usul, p . 85; Hitu, Wajiz, p. 305. As for the Ahad pertaining to subsidiary matters which are not essential to
dogma such as the torture of the grave ('adhab al-qabr), intercession (shafa'ah), etc., these must be accepted and believed. Anyone who denies them is a sinner
(fasiq) but not a kafir, as he denies something which is not decisively proven.] As the Qur'an tells us , 'verily conjecture avails
nothing against the truth' (al-Najm, 53:28) Ahad, being conjectural, does not establish the truth.
According to the majority of the ulema of the four Sunni schools, acting upon Ahad is obligatory even
if Ahad fails to engender positive knowledge. Thus in practical legal matters, a preferable zann is
sufficient as a basis of obligation. It is only in matters of belief where conjecture  'avails nothing against
the truth'.[114. Badran, Usul, p. 91; Khudari, Usul, p. 227. ] Having said this, however, Ahad may only form the basis of
obligation if it fulfills the following requirements:
a. That the transmitter is a competent person, which means that reports communicated by a child
or a lunatic of whatever age are unacceptable. Women, blind persons and slaves are considered
competent for purposes of reporting the Hadith; it is only in regard to being a witness that they

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 74suffer some disability.[115. Khudari, Usul, p. 217.] 
b. The transmitter of Ahad must be a Muslim, which means that a report by a non-Muslim is
unacceptable. However, the reporter must fulfill this condition only at the time of reporting the
Hadith, but not necessarily at the time when he received the information. There are instances of
Hadith, for example, reported by Companions pertaining to the acts of the Prophet which they
observed before they had professed Islam.' [116. Khudari, Usul, p. 216.]c. The transmitter must be an upright person ('adl) at the time of reporting the Hadith. The
minimum requirement of this condition is that the person has not committed a major sin and
does not persist in committing minor ones; nor is he known for persistence in degrading
profanities such as eating in the-public thoroughfare, associating with persons of ill repute and
indulgence in humiliating jokes. Although the ulema are unanimous on the requirement of
uprightness of character ('adalah), they are not in agreement as to what it precisely means.
According to the Hanafis, a Muslim who is not a sinner (fasiq) is presumed to be upright. The
Shafi'is are more specific on the avoidance of sins, both major and minor, as well as indulgence
in profane mubahat. To the Maliki jurist, Ibn al-Hajib, 'adalah refers to piety, observance of
religious duties and propriety of conduct. There is also some disagreement among the ulema on
the definition of, and distinction between, major and minor sins. [117. For details on the conditions of Ahad see
Shawkani, Irshad, pp. 48-52.; Hitu, Wajiz, p. 307ff; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 86; Mahmassani, Falsafah, p. 74.] 
The 'adalah of a transmitter must be established by positive proof. Hence when the 'adalah of a
transmitter is unknown, his report is unacceptable. Similarly, a report by an anonymous person
(riwayah al-majhul) such as when the chain of transmitters reads in part that 'a man' reported
such-and-such is unacceptable. The 'adalah of a narrator may be established by various means
including tazkiyah, that is when at least one upright person confirms it, or when the transmitter
is known to have been admitted as a witness in court, or when a faqih or a learned person is
known to have relied or acted on his report. But there must be positive evidence that the faqih
did not do so due to additional factors such as a desire on his part merely to be cautious. [118.
Khudari, Usul, p.217.] 
The qualification of 'adalah is established for all the Companions regardless of their juristic or
political views. This conclusion is based on the Qur'an which declares in a reference to the
Companions that 'God is well pleased with them, as they are with Him' (al-Tawbah, 9:100). A
person's reputation for being upright and trustworthy also serves as a proof of his reliability.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 75According to some ulema of Hadith, such a reputation is even more credible than confirmation
by one or two individuals.[119. Shawkani, Irshad, p.67; Badran, Usul, p. 92.] With regard to certain figures such
as Imam Malik, Sufyan al-Thawri, Sufyan b. 'Uyaynah, al-Layth b. Sa'd, etc., their reputation
for 'adalah is proof of reliability above the technicalities of tazkiyah. [120. Khudari, Usul, p.217.] 
d. The narrator of Ahad must possess a retentive memory so that his report may be trusted. If he is
known for committing frequent errors and inconsistencies, his report is unacceptable. The
faculty of retention, or dabt, is the ability of a person to listen to an utterance, to comprehend its
meaning as it was originally intended and then to retain it and take all necessary precautions to
safeguard its accuracy. In cases of doubt in the retentiveness of a transmitter, if his report can
be confirmed by the action of his predecessors, it may be accepted. But in the absence of such
verification, reports by persons who are totally obscure and whose retentiveness cannot be
established are unacceptable.[121. Shawkani, Irshad, p. 52; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 86; Badran, Usul, p. 93; Khudari, Usul, p. 218.] 
e. That the narrator is not implicated in any form of distortion (tadlis) either in the textual contents
(matn) of a Hadith or in its chain of transmitters (isnad). Distortion in the text is to add to the
saying of the Prophet elements which did not exist, or to detract from its original content so as
to distort its purport and mislead the listener. Tadlis in the isnad is to tamper with the names
and identity of narrators, which is, essentially, not very different from outright forgery.[122.
Shawkani, Irshad, p. 55.] One form of tadlis is to omit a link in the chain of narrators. The motive for
such omission is immaterial. Sometimes it is observed, for example, that a single weak link in
an otherwise reliable chain of transmitters is omitted with a view to showing the isnad reliable
in every part. Whatever the motive may be, a tadlis of this kind is, for all intents and purposes,
equivalent to forgery. However, if the narrator is a prominent scholar of irreproachable
reputation, his report is normally accepted notwithstanding a minor omission in the chain of
isnad. [123. Khud ari, Usul, pp. 218-219.] 
f. The transmitter of Ahad must, in addition, have met with and heard the Hadith directly from his
immediate source. The contents of the Hadith must not be outlandish (shadhdh) in the sense of
being contrary to the established norms of the Qur'an and other principles of Shari'ah. In
addition, the report must be free of subtle errors such as rendering ab as ibn ('father' as 'son') or
other such words that are similar in appearance but differ in meaning. [124. Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 85.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 76The three Imams, Abu Hanifah, al-Shafi'i and Ahmad b. Hanbal rely on Ahad when it fulfills the
foregoing conditions. Abu Hanifah, however, has laid down certain additional conditions, one of which
is that the narrator's action must not contradict his narration. It is on this ground, for example, that Abu
Hanifah does not rely on the following Hadith, narrated by Abu Hurayrah: 'When a dog licks a dish,
wash it seven times, one of which must be with clean sand." [125. Muslim, Sahih Muslim, p. 41, Hadith no. 119.]
Abu Hanifah has explained this by saying that Abu Hurayrah did not act upon it himself. Since the
requirement of washing is normally three times, the report is considered weak, including its attribution
to Abu Hurayrah. [126. Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 85.] The majority, on the other hand, take the view that discrepancies
between the action and the report of a narrator may be due to forgetfulness or some other unknown
factor. Discrepancies of this kind do not, by themselves, provide conclusive evidence to render the
report unreliable.
The Hanafis further require that the subject matter of Ahad is not such that would necessitate the
knowledge of a vast number of people. If, for example, we are informed, by means of a solitary report,
of an act or saying of the Prophet which was supposed to be known by hundreds or thousands of people
and yet only one or two have reported it, such a Hadith would not be reliable. The Hadith, for example,
that 'Anyone who touches his sexual organ must take a fresh ablution', [127. Tabrizi, Mishkat, I, 104, Hadith no. 319. ]
is not accepted by the Hanafis. The Hanafis have explained: had this Hadith been authentic, it would
have become an established practice among all Muslims, which is not the case. The Hadith is therefore
not reliable. The majority of ulema, however, do not insist on this requirement on the analysis that
people who witness or observe an incident do not necessarily report it. We know, for example, that
countless numbers of people saw the prophet performing the pilgrimage of hajj, and yet not many
reported their observations. [128. Hitu, Wajiz, p. 302; Badran, Usul, p. 95. ]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 77And finally, the Hanafis maintain that when the narrator of Ahad is not a faqih, his report is accepted
only if it agrees with qiyas, otherwise qiyas would be given priority over Ahad. However, if the narrator
is known to be a faqih, then his report would be preferred over qiyas. It is on this ground, for example,
that the Hanafis have rejected the Hadith of musarrat, that is the animal whose milk is retained in its
udders so as to impress the buyer. The Hadith is as follows: 'Do not retain milk in the udders of a she-
camel or goat so as to exaggerate its yield. Anyone who buys a musarrat has the choice, for three days
after having milked it, either to keep it, or to return it with a quantity [i.e. a sa'] of dates.[129. Muslim, Sahih
Muslim, p. 248, Hadith no. 928.]
The Hanafis regard this Hadith to be contrary to qiyas, that is, to analogy with the rule of equality
between indemnity and loss. Abu Hanifah has held the view that the sa' of dates may not be equal in
value to the amount of milk the buyer has consumed. Hence if the buyer wishes to return the beast, he
must return it with the cost of milk which was in its udders at the time of purchase, not with a fixed
quantity of dates. The majority of ulema, including Malik, Shafi'i, Ibn Hanbal and the disciples of Abu
Hanifah, (Abu Yusuf and Zufar), have on the other hand accepted this Hadith and have given it priority
over qiyas. According to the majority view, the compensation may consist of a sa' of dates or of its
monetary value. Dates were specified in the Hadith as it used to be the staple food in those days, which
may not be the case any more. [130. Hitu, Wajiz, p. 304; Badran, Usul, pp. 97-98 ]Imam Malik would rely on a solitary Hadith on condition that it does not disagree with the practice of
the Madinese (amal ahl al-Madinah). For he considers the standard practice of the people of Madinah to
be more representative of the conduct of the Prophet than the isolated report of one or two individuals.
In his opinion, the Madinese practice represents the narration of thousands upon thousands of people
from, ultimately, the Prophet. It is, in other words, equivalent to a Mashhur, or even Mutawatir. When
an Ahad report contradicts the practice of the Madinese, the latter is, according to the Maliki view,
given priority over the former. The Malikis have thus refused to follow the Hadith regarding the option
of cancellation (khiyar al-majlis) which provides that 'the parties to a sale are free to change their minds
so long as they have not left the meeting of the contract'.


Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 78The reason being that this Hadith is contrary to the practice of the people of Madinah.[131. Shafi'i, Risalah, p.
140; Muslim, Sahih Muslim, p. 251, Hadith no. 944; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 85.] The Madinese practice on this point subscribed to the
view that a contract is complete when the parties express their agreement through a valid offer and
acceptance. The contract is binding as of that moment regardless as to whether the 'meeting of contract'
continues or not.
All the four Imams of jurisprudence have considered Ahad to be authoritative in principle, and none
reject it unless there is evidence to suggest a weakness in its attribution to the Prophet, or which may
contradict some other evidence that is more authoritative in their view.
The majority of ulema do not insist that the Ahad should consist of a verbatim transmission of what the
narrator heard in the first place, although this is the most authoritative form of transmission in any kind
of Hadith. They would instead accept the conceptual transmission of an Ahad, on condition, however,
that the narrator understands the language and purport of the Hadith in full. Only then would the
rendering of the Hadith in the narrator's own words, which conveys an equivalent meaning, be
acceptable. However if the narrator does not possess this degree of knowledge and is unable to transmit
the Hadith in its original form, all the four Sunni schools are in agreement that his own rendering of the
concept of the Hadith is unacceptable. [132. Hitu, Wajiz, pp.317ff; Badran, Usul, pp. 93-94.]Some ulema of the Hanafi and other schools have held that conceptual transmission is totally forbidden,
a view which is refuted by the majority, who say that the Companions often transmitted one and the
same Hadith in varying words, and no-one can deny this. One of the most prominent Companions, 'Abd
Allah b. Mas'ud, is noted for having reported many ahadith from the Prophet and made it known that
'the Prophet (S) said this, or something like this, or something very close to this'. No one has challenged
the validity of this manner of reporting; hence the permissibility of conceptual transmission is
confirmed by the practice of the Companions, and their consensus is quoted in its support. Having said
this, however, accuracy in the transmission of Hadith and retaining its original version is highly
recommended. [133. Khudari, Usul, p. 229.] This is, in fact, the purport of a Hadith from the Prophet which reads:
'May God bless with success one who heard me saying something, and who conveys it to others as he
heard it; and may the next transmitter be even more retentive than the one from whom he received it.'[134. Tabrizi, Mishkat, I, 78, Hadith no. 230; Khudari, Usul, p. 229.]


Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 79Sometimes the transmitter reports a Hadith but omits a part of it. The question then arises as to whether
this form of transmission is permissible at all. In principle, the narrator of Hadith, of any type of Hadith,
must not omit any part which is integral to its meaning. For instance: when the omitted part consists of
a condition, or an exception to the main theme of the Hadith, or which makes a reference to the scope of
its application. However, the narrator may omit a part of the Hadith which does not affect the meaning
of the remaining part. For in this case, the Hadith at issue will be regarded, for all intents and purposes,
as two ahadith. It has been a familiar practice among the ulema to omit a part of the Hadith which does
not have a bearing on its main theme. But if the omission is such that it would bring the quoted part into
conflict with its full version, then the issue will be determined, not under the foregoing, but under the
rules of conflict and preference (al-ta'arud wa'l-tarjih). In any case, the preferred practice is not to omit
any part of the Hadith, as the omitted part may well contain valuable information on some point and
serve a purpose that may not have occurred to the narrator himself. [135. Khudari, Usul, p.227; Hitu, Wajiz, pp.319-320.]In certain ahadith which are reported by a number of transmitters, there is sometimes an addition to the
text of a Hadith by one transmitter which is absent in the reports of the same Hadith by others. The first
point to ascertain in a discrepancy of this nature is to find out whether the Hadith in question was
originally uttered in one and the same meeting/occasion or on different occasions. If the latter is the
case, then there is no conflict and both versions may be accepted as they are. But if it is established that
the different versions all originated in one and the same meeting, then normally the version which is
transmitted by more narrators will prevail over that which is variantly transmitted by one, provided that
the former are not known for errors and oversight in reporting. Consequently, the additional part of the
Hadith which is reported by a single transmitter will be isolated and rejected for the simple reason that
error by one person is more likely in this case than by a multitude. But if the single narrator who has
reported the addition is an eminently reliable person and the rest are known for careless reporting, then
his version will be preferred, although some ulema of Hadith do not agree with this. Additions and
discrepancies that might be observed in the isnad, such as when a group of narrators report a Hadith as a
Mursal whereas one person has reported it as a Musnad (that is, a Muttasil, or continous) - will be
determined by the same method which applies to discrepancy in the text. However, sometimes the
preference of one over the other version may be determined on different grounds. To give an example,
according to one Hadith, 'Whoever buys foodstuff is not to sell the same before it is delivered to him.'
However, according to another report the Prophet has issued a more general instruction according to
which the Muslims are forbidden from selling that which they do not have in their possession.


Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 80The Hanafis have preferred the second version, as it is conveyed in broader terms which comprise
foodstuffs as well as other commodities. [136. Tabrizi, Mishkat, II, 863, Hadith no. 2844; Ibn Majah, Sunan, II, 737, Hadith no 2187;
Khudari, Usul, p. 233; Hitu, Wajiz, pp. 318-319.]II. The Discontinued Hadith ( al-Hadith Ghayr al-Muttasil )This is a Hadith whose chain of transmitters does not extend all the way back to the Prophet. It occurs
in three varieties: Mursal, Mu'dal and Munqati'. The Mursal, which is the main variety of discontinued
Hadith, is sometimes also referred to as Munqati'. The Mursal  is defined as a Hadith which a Successor
(tabi'i) has directly attributed to the Prophet without mentioning the last link, namely the Companion
who might have narrated it from the Prophet. This is the majority definition. The Hanafis, however,
have defined Mursal  as a Hadith that a reliable narrator has attributed to the Prophet while omitting a
part of its isnad. The missing link may be a Companion or even a Successor, according to the majority,
but it may be a narrator among the second generation of Successors according to the Hanafis. Since the
identity of the missing link is not known, it is possible that he might have been an upright person, or
not. Because of these and other similar doubts in its transmission, in principle, the ulema of Hadith do
not accept the Mursal .[137. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 316; Khudari, Usul , p.229; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.86.] According to al-Shawkani, 'The
majority of ulema of usul have defined Mursal  as a Hadith transmitted by one who has not met with the
Prophet, (S) and yet quotes the Prophet, (S) directly. The transmitter may be a Successor or a follower
(tabi' al-tabi'i ) or anyone after that.' Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal does not rely on it, nor does Imam Shafi'i
unless it is reported by a famous Successor who is known to have met with a number of Companions.
Thus a Mursal  transmitted by prominent Successors such as Said b. al-Musayyib, al-Zuhri, 'Alqamah,
Masruq, al-Sha'bi, Hasan al-Basri, Qatadah, etc., is accepted, provided that it fulfills the following
conditions. [138. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 64; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 87.]Firstly, that the Mursal  is supported by another and more reliable Hadith with a continuous chain of
transmitters, in which case it is the latter that would represent the stronger evidence.
Secondly, that one Mursal  is supported by another Mursal , and the latter is accepted and relied upon by
the ulema.
Thirdly, that the Mursal  is in harmony with the precedent of the Companions, in which case it is
elevated and attributed to the Prophet. The process here is called raf', and the Hadith is called Marfu'.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 81Fourthly, that the Mursal has been approved by the ulema, and a number of them are known to have
relied on it.
Fifthly, that the transmitter of Mursal has a reputation not to have reported weak and doubtful Hadith.
For instance the Mursal transmitted by Said b. al-Musayyib or any one of the prominent Successors
mentioned above is normally acceptable.' [139. Badran, Usul , p. 100; Khudari, Usul , p.231; Khin,  Athar , p.399.]When a Mursal is strengthened in any of these ways, especially when the Successor who has reported it
is a leading figure and has met with the Companions, Imam Shafi'i would accept it. But even so, if the
Mursal in question is contradicted by another Hadith which is more reliable, the latter will take priority.
The foregoing basically explains al-Shafi'i's approach to the Mursal. Imam Abu Hanifah and Imam
Malik, on the other hand, are less stringent in their acceptance of the Mursal. They accept not only the
Mursal which is transmitted by a Successor, but also one which is transmitted by the second generation
of Followers, known as tabi' al-tabi'i. In support of this they quote the Hadith in which the Prophet is
reported to have said, 'Honour my Companions, for they are the best among you, then those who follow
them and then the next generation; and then lying will proliferate.' [140. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 904; Isnawi, Nihayah , II, 223;
Tabrizi, Mishkat , III, 1695, Hadith no. 6003.]
However, both Imams Abu Hanifah and Malik add the proviso that the narrator of a Mursal must be a
leading transmitter of Hadith, failing which his report will be unacceptable. They rely on it only when
they are assured of the trustworthiness of the narrator. They have held the view that when an upright
and learned man is convinced about the truth and reliability of a report, he tends to link it directly to the
Prophet, saying that the Prophet said such-and-such, but when he is not so convinced, he refers to the
person from whom he received it. Examples of such Mursals are those that are transmitted by
Muhammad b. Hasan al-Shaybani who is a tabi' al-tabi'i but considered to be reliable. The majority of
ulema are of the view that acting upon a Mursal Hadith is not obligatory.[141. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 64; Abu Zahrah, Usul ,
p. 87; Khin,  Athar , p. 401.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 82The differential approaches that the leading Imams have taken toward the reliability of the Mursal may
be partially explained by the fact that Shafi'i and Ahmad b. Hanbal lived at a time when the distance to
the Prophet was further extended. Hence they felt the need of continuity in transmission more strongly
than their predecessors, Abu Hanifah and Malik.
The remaining two varieties of disconnected Hadith that need only briefly to be mentioned are the
Munqati' and the Mu'dal. The former refers to a Hadith whose chain of narrators has a single missing
link somewhere in the middle. The Mu'dal on the other hand is a Hadith in which two consecutive links
are missing in the chain of its narrators. Neither of them are acceptable; and the ulema are in agreement
on this.[142. Azami, Studies , p. 43; Hitu, Wajiz , p.316.]Sahih, Hasan and Da'ifFrom the viewpoint of their reliability, the narrators of Hadith have been graded into the following
categories: (1) the Companions who are generally accepted to be reliable; (2.) thiqat thabitun, or those
who rank highest in respect of reliability next to the Companions; (3) thiqat, or trustworthy but of a
lesser degree than the first two; (4) saduq, or truthful, that is one who is not known to have committed a
forgery or serious errors; (5) saduq yahim, that is truthful but committing errors; (6) maqbul or
accepted, which implies that there is no proof to the effect that his report is unreliable; (7) majhul, or a
narrator of unknown identity. These are followed by lower classes of persons who are classified as
sinners (fussaq), those suspected of lying, and outright liars. [143. Azami, Studies , p. 60.]Hadith is classified as Sahih or authentic when its narrators belong to the first three categories.[144. Azami,
Studies  p. 62.] It is defined as a Hadith with a continuous isnad all the way back to the Prophet consisting of
upright persons who also possess retentive memories and whose narration is free both of obvious and of
subtle defects. [145. Shawkani, Irshad ; p.64; Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 94; Hitu, Wajiz  p.321.]The Hasan Hadith differs from the Sahih in that it may include among its narrators a person or persons
who belong to the fourth, fifth or sixth grades on the foregoing scale. It is a Hadith that falls between
Sahih and Da'if, and although its narrators are known for truthfulness, they have not attained the highest
degree of reliability and prominence. [146. Siba'i, Al-Sunnah , p. 95; Azami, Studies, p. 62.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 83The weak, or Daif, is a Hadith whose narrators do not possess the qualifications required in Sahih or
Hasan. It is called weak owing to a weakness that exists in its chain of narrators or in its textual
contents. Its narrator is known to have had a bad memory, or his integrity and piety has been subjected
to serious doubt.[147. Siba'i, Sunnah , loc.cit.] There are several varieties of Daif; Mursal is one of them. The
ulema of Hadith, including Imam Muslim, do not consider Mursal to amount to a shar'i proof ( hujjah ).
There are other categories of Daif, including Shadhdh, Munkar and Mudtarib which need not be
elaborated here. Briefly, Shadhdh is a Hadith with a poor isnad which is at odds with a more reliable
Hadith. Munkar is a Hadith whose narrator cannot be classified to be upright and retentive of memory;
and Mudtarib is a Hadith whose contents are inconsistent with a number of other reports, none of which
can be preferred over the others. [148. Siba'i, Sunnah , p.96.]According to the general rule, the overall acceptability of a Hadith is determined on the weakest
element in its proof. Thus the presence of a single weak narrator in the chain of isnad  would result in
weakening the Hadith altogether. If one of the narrators is suspected of lying whereas all the rest are
classified as trustworthy (thiqat) and the Hadith is not known through other channels, then it will be
graded as weak. In scrutinising the reliability of Hadith, the ulema of Hadith are guided by the rule that
every Hadith must be traced back to the Prophet through a continuous chain of narrators whose piety
and reputation are beyond reproach. A Hadith which does not fulfill these requirements is not accepted.
A weak or Daif Hadith does not constitute a shar'i proof (hujjah) and is generally rejected.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 84Chapter Four: Rules of Interpretation I:  Deducing the Law from its SourcesIntroductory RemarksTo interpret the Qur'an or the Sunnah with a view to deducing legal rules from the indications that they
provide, it is necessary that the language of the Qur'an and the Sunnah be clearly understood. To be able
to utilise these sources, the mujtahid must obtain a firm grasp of the words of the text and their precise
implications. For this purpose, the ulema of usul include the classification of words and their usages in
the methodology of usul al-fiqh. The rules which govern the origin of words, their usages and
classification are primarily determined on linguistic grounds and, as such, they are not an integral part
of the law or religion. But they are instrumental as an aid to the correct understanding of the Shari’ah.
Normally the mujtahid will not resort to interpretation when the text itself is self-evident and clear. But
by far the greater part of fiqh consists of rules which are derived through interpretation and ijtihad. As
will be discussed later, ijtihad can take a variety of forms, and interpretation which aims at the correct
understanding of the words and sentences of a legal text is of crucial significance to all forms of ijtihad.
The function of interpretation is to discover the intention of the Lawgiver - or of any person for that
matter - from his speech and actions. Interpretation is primarily concerned with the discovery of that
which is not self-evident. Thus the object of interpretation in Islamic Law, as in any other law, is to
ascertain the intention of the Lawgiver with regard to what has been left unexpressed as a matter of
necessary inference from the surrounding circumstances.[1. Cf. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 78. ]From the viewpoints of their clarity, scope, and capacity to convey a certain meaning, words have been
classified into various types. With reference to their conceptual clarity, the ulema of usul have classified
words into the two main categories of 'clear' and 'unclear' words. The main purpose of this division is to
identify the extent to which the meaning of a word is made clear or left ambiguous and doubtful. The
significance of this classification can be readily observed in the linguistic forms and implications of
commands and prohibitions. The task of evaluating the precise purport of a command is greatly
facilitated if one is able to ascertain the degree of clarity (or of ambiguity) in which it is conveyed. Thus
the manifest ( Zahir ) and explicit ( Nass ) are 'clear' words, and yet the jurist may abandon their primary
meaning in favour of a different meaning as the context and circumstances may require. Words are also
classified, from the viewpoint of their scope, into homonym, general, specific, absolute and qualified.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 85This classification basically explains the grammatical application of words to concepts: whether a word
imparts one or more than one meaning, whether a word is of a specific or general import, and whether
the absolute application of a word to its subject matter can be qualified and limited in scope.
From the viewpoint of their actual use, such as whether a word is used in its primary, secondary, literal,
technical or customary sense, words are once again divided into the two main categories of literal
(Haqiqi) and metaphorical (Majazi). The methodology of usul al-fiqh tells us, for example, that
commands and prohibitions may not be issued in metaphorical terms as this would introduce
uncertainty in their application. And yet there are exceptions to this, such as when the metaphorical
becomes the dominant meaning of a word to the point that the literal or original meaning is no longer in
use.
The strength of a legal rule is to a large extent determined by the language in which it is communicated.
To distinguish the clear from the ambiguous and to determine the degrees of clarity/ambiguity in word
also helps the jurist in his efforts at resolving instances of conflict in the law. When the mujtahid is
engaged in the deduction of rules from indications which often amount to no more than probabilities,
some of his conclusions may turn out to be at odds with others. Ijtihad is therefore not only in need of
comprehending the language of the law, but also needs a methodology and guidelines with which to
resolve instance of conflict in its conclusions.
We shall be taking up each of these topics in the following pages, but it will be useful to start this
section with a discussion of ta'wil.Ta'wil (Allegorical Interpretation)It should be noted at the outset that in Arabic there are two common words for 'interpretation', namely
tafsir  and ta'wil . The latter is perhaps closer to 'interpretation', whereas tafsir  literally means
'explanation'. The English equivalents of these terms do not convey the same difference between them
which is indicated in their Arabic usage. 'Allegorical interpretation' is an acceptable equivalent of ta'wil ,
but I prefer the original Arabic to its English equivalent. I propose therefore to explain the difference
between tafsir  and ta'wil  and then to use ' ta'wil ' as it is.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 86Tafsir  basically aims at explaining the meaning of a given text and deducing a hukm  from it within the
confines of its words and sentences. [2. Badran, Bayan, p. 124 ff.] The explanation so provided is, in other words,
borne out by the content and linguistic composition of the text.
Ta'wil , on the other hand, goes beyond the literal meaning of words and sentences and reads into them a
hidden meaning which is often based on speculative reasoning and Ijtihad . The norm in regard to words
is that they impart their obvious meaning.  Ta'wil is a departure from this norm, and is presumed to be
absent unless there is reason to justify its application.[3. Khallaf, 'Ilm, pp. 167-68.] Ta'wil  may operate in various
capacities, such as specifying the general, or qualifying the absolute terms of a given text. All words are
presumed to convey their absolute, general, and unqualified meanings unless there is reason to warrant
a departure to an alternative meaning.
From a juridical perspective, ta'wil  and tafsir  share the same basic purpose, which is to clarify the law
and to discover the intention of the Lawgiver in the light of the indications, some of which may be
definite and others more remote. Both are primarily concerned with speech that is not self-evident and
requires clarification. Sometimes the Lawgiver or the proper legislative authority provides the
necessary explanation to a legal text. This variety of explanation, known as tafsir tashri'i , is an integral
part of the law. To this may be added tafsir which is based on definitive indications in the text and
constitutes a necessary and logical part of it. Beyond this, all other explanations, whether in the form of
tafsir or of ta'wil , partake in the nature of opinion and ijtihad  and as such do not constitute an integral
part of the law. The distinction between tafsir  and ta'wil is not always clear-cut and obvious. An
explanation or commentary on a legal text may partake in both, and the two may converge at certain
points. It is nevertheless useful to be aware of the basic distinction between tafsir  and ta'wil . We should
also bear in mind that in the context of usul al-fiqh , especially in our discussion of the rules of
interpretation, it is ta'wil  rather than tafsir  with which we are primarily concerned.
The ulema of  usul have defined  ta'wil as departure from the manifest ( Zahir ) meaning of a text in
favour of another meaning where there is evidence to justify the departure.[4. Amidi,  Ihkam , III, 53; Badran, Usul , p.
400.] Ta'wil  which is attempted in accordance with the conditions that ensure its propriety is generally
accepted, and the ulema of all ages, including the Companions, have applied it in their efforts at
deducing legal rules from the Qur'an and Sunnah . Ta'wil  which is properly constructed constitutes a
valid basis for judicial decisions. But to ensure the propriety of ta'wil , it must fulfil certain conditions,
which are as follows: (1) That there is some evidence to warrant the application of ta'wil , and that it is
not founded on mere inclination or personal opinion. (2) That the word or words of a given text are
amenable to ta'wil . In this way only certain types of words, including for example the manifest ( Zahir )
and explicit ( Nass ), are open to ta'wil , but not the unequivocal ( Mufassar ) and the perspicuous

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 87(Muhkam ). Similarly, the general ( 'Amm ) and the absolute ( Mutlaq ) are susceptible to ta'wil but not the
specific ( Khass ) and the qualified ( Muqayyad ), although there are cases where these too have been
subjected to  ta'wil . (3) That the word which is given an allegorical interpretation has a propensity, even
if only a weak one, in favour of that interpretation. This condition would preclude a far-fetched
interpretation that goes beyond the capacity of the words of a given text. (4) That the person who
attempts ta'wil is qualified to do so and that his interpretation is in harmony with the rules of the
language and customary or juridical usage. Thus it would be unacceptable if the word qur' in the
Qur'anic text (al-Baqarah, 2:228) were to be given a meaning other than the two meanings which it
bears, namely menstruation ( hayd ) and the clean period between menstruations (tuhr). For qur' cannot
carry an additional meaning, and any attempt to give it one would violate the rules of the language. But
ta'wil  in the sense of a shift from the literal to the metaphorical and from the general to the specific is
not a peculiarity of Arabic, in that words in any language are, in fact, amenable to these possibilities.[5.
Amidi, Ihkam , III, 54; Badran, Usul, pp. 400-401.]There are two types of  ta'wil , namely ta'wil which is remote and far-fetched, and 'relevant' ta'wil  which
is within the scope of what might be thought of as correct understanding. An example of the first type is
the Hanafi interpretation of a Hadith which instructed a Companion, Firuz al-Daylami, who professed
Islam while he was married to two sisters, to 'retain [ amsik ] one of the two, whichever you wish, and
separate from the other'.[6. Tabrizi, Mishkat , III, 948, Hadith no. 3178; Amidi, Ihkam , II, 54; Badran, Usul, p. 401.]
The Hanafis have interpreted this Hadith to the effect that al-Daylami was asked to contract a new
marriage with one of the sisters, if they happened to have been married in a single contract of marriage,
but that if they had been married in two separate contracts, to retain the one whom he married first,
without a contract. The Hanafis have resorted to this ta'wil apparently because of the Shari'ah rule
which does not permit two women to be married in a single contract. If this were to be the case, then a
new contract would be necessary with the one who is to be retained.
But this is regarded as a remote interpretation, one which is not supported by the wording of the Hadith.
Besides, al-Daylami was a new convert to Islam who could not be presumed to be knowledgeable of the
rules of Shari'ah. Had the Prophet intended the meaning that the Hanafis have given to the Hadith, the
Prophet would have clarified it himself. As it is, the Hanafi interpretation cannot be sustained by the
contents of the Hadith, which is why it is regarded as far-fetched. [7. Amidi, Ihkam , III, 56; Badran, Usul , p. 401. See for
more examples of far-fetched interpretation, Amidi, Ihkam, III, 55-64.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 88Ta'wil  is relevant and correct if it can be accepted without recourse to forced and far-fetched arguments.
The interpretation, for example, which the majority of ulema have given to the phrase 'idha qumtum
ila'l-salah' ('when you stand for prayers') in the Qur'anic text concerning the requirement of ablution for
salah (al-Ma'idah, 5:7) to mean 'when you intend to pray' is relevant and correct; for without it, there
would be some irregularity in the understanding of the text. The passage under discussion reads, in the
relevant part: 'O believers, when you stand for salah , wash your faces, and your hands up to the elbows.
. . ' 'When you stand for salah ' here is understood to mean 'when you intend to perform salah '. The fact
that ablution is required before entering the salah is the proper interpretation of the text, as the
Lawgiver could not be said to have required the faithful to perform the ablution after having started the
salah.  [8. Badran, Usul , p. 402.]To set a total ban on ta'wil, and always to try to follow the literal meaning of the Qur'an  and Sunnah,
which is what the Zahiris have tended to do, is likely to lead to a departure from the spirit of the law
and its general purpose. It is, on the other hand, equally valid to say that interpretation must be
attempted carefully and only when it is necessary and justified, for otherwise the law could be subjected
to arbitrariness and abuse. A correct interpretation is one for which support could be found in the nusus,
in analogy (qiyas), or in the general principles of the law. Normally a correct interpretation does not
conflict with the explicit injunction of the law, and its accuracy is borne out by the contents of the text
itself. [9. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 166.]Classification I: Clear and Unclear WordsFrom the viewpoint of clarity (wuduh), words are divided into the two main categories of clear and
unclear words. A clear word conveys a concept which is intelligible without recourse to interpretation.
A ruling which is communicated in clear words constitutes the basis of obligation, without any recourse
to ta'wil. A word is unclear, on the other hand, when it lacks the foregoing qualities: the meaning which
it conveys is ambiguous/incomplete, and requires clarification. An ambiguous text which is in need of
clarification cannot constitute the basis of action. The clarification so required can only be supplied
through extraneous evidence, for the text itself is deficient and fails to convey a complete meaning
without recourse to evidence outside its contents. A clear text, on the other hand, is self-contained, and
needs no recourse to extraneous evidence.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 89From the viewpoint of the degree of clarity and conceptual strength, clear words are divided into four
types in a ranking which starts with the least clear, namely the manifest ( Zahir ) and then the explicit
(Nass ), which commands greater clarity than the Zahir. This is followed by the unequivocal ( Mufassar )
and finally the perspicuous ( Muhkam ), which ranks highest in respect of clarity. And then from the
viewpoint of the degree of ambiguity in their meaning, words are classified, once again, into four types
which start with the least ambiguous and end by the most ambiguous in the range. We shall begin with
an exposition of the clear words.I. 1 & 2 The Zahir  and the NassThe manifest ( Zahir ) is a word which has a clear meaning and yet is open to ta'wil, primarily because
the meaning that it conveys is not in harmony with the context in which it occurs. It is a word which has
a literal original meaning of its own but which leaves open the possibility of an alternative
interpretation. For example, the word 'lion' in the sentence 'I saw a lion' is clear enough, but it is
possible, although less likely, that the speaker might have meant a brave man. Zahir has been defined as
a word or words which convey a clear meaning, while this meaning is not the principal theme of the
text in which they appear. [10. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.161; Badran, Usul , p. 403; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 93. ]When a word conveys a clear meaning that is also in harmony with the context in which it appears, and
yet is still open to ta'wil , it is classified as Nass. The distinction between the Zahir and Nass mainly
depends on their relationship with the context in which they occur. Zahir and Nass both denote clear
words, but the two differ in that the former does not constitute the dominant theme of the text whereas
the Nass does. These may be illustrated in the Qur,anic text concerning polygamy, as follows:
And if you fear that you cannot treat the orphans justly, then marry the women who
seem good to you, two, three or four (al-Nisa, 4:3)
Two points constitute the principal theme of this ayah, one of which is that polygamy is permissible,
and the other that it must be limited to the maximum of four. We may therefore say that these are the
explicit rulings ( Nass ) of this text. But this text also establishes the legality of marriage between men
and women, especially in the part where it reads 'marry of the women who seem good to you'.
However, legalising marriage is not the principal theme of this text, but only a subsidiary point. The
main theme is the Nass and the incidental point is the Zahir . [11. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 93; Badran, Usul , p. 402.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 90The effect of the Zahir and the Nass is that their obvious meanings must be followed and action upon
them is obligatory unless there is evidence to warrant recourse to ta'wil , that is, to a different
interpretation which might be in greater harmony with the intention of the Lawgiver. For the basic rules
of interpretation require that the obvious meaning of words should be accepted and followed unless
there is a compelling reason for abandoning the obvious meaning. When we say that the Zahir is open
to ta'wil, it means that when the Zahir is general, it may be specified, and when it is absolute, it may be
restricted and qualified. Similarly the literal meaning of the Zahir may be abandoned in favour of a
metaphorical meaning. And finally, the Zahir is susceptible to abrogation which, in the case of the
Qur'an and Sunnah, could only occur during the lifetime of the Prophet. An example of the Zahir which
is initially conveyed in absolute terms but has subsequently been qualified is the Qur'anic text (al-Nisa',
4:24) which spells out the prohibited degrees of relationship in marriage. The text then continues, 'and
lawful to you are women other than these, provided you seek them by means of your wealth and marry
them properly. . .' The passage preceding this ayah refers to a number of female relatives with whom
marriage is forbidden, but there is no reference anywhere in this passage either to polygamy or to
marriage with the paternal and maternal aunt of one's wife. The apparent or Zahir meaning of this
passage, especially in the part where it reads 'and lawful to you are women other than these' would seem
to validate polygamy beyond the limit of four, and also marriage to the paternal and maternal aunt of
one's wife. However, the absolute terms of this ayah have been qualified by another ruling of the Qur'an
(al-Nisa', 4:3) quoted earlier which limits polygamy to four. The other qualification to the text under
discussion is provided by the Mashhur Hadith which forbids simultaneous marriage with the maternal
and paternal aunt of one's wife.[12. Abu Dawud, Sunan  (Hasan's trans.), II, 551, Hadith no. 2060; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 163; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 94.]This illustration also serves to show an instance of conflict between the Zahir and the Nass. Since the
second of the two ayat under discussion is a Nass, it is one degree stronger than the Zahir and would
therefore prevail. This question of conflicts between the Zahir and Nass will be further discussed later.
It will be noted that Nass, in addition to the technical meaning which we shall presently elaborate, has a
more general meaning which is commonly used by the fuqaha'. In the terminology of fiqh, Nass means
a definitive text or ruling of the Qur'an or the Sunnah. Thus it is said that this or that ruling is a Nass,
which means that it is a definitive injunction of the Qur'an or Sunnah. But Nass as opposed to Zahir
denotes a word or words that convey a clear meaning, and also represents the principal theme of the text
in which it occurs. An example of Nass in the Qur'an is the Qur'anic text on the priority of debts and
bequests over inheritance in the administration of an estate. The relevant ayah assigns specific shares to
a number of heirs and then provides that the distribution of shares in all cases is to take place 'after the
payment of legacies and debts' (al-Nisa', 4:11). Similarly, the Qur'anic text which provides that
'unlawful to you are the dead carcass and blood' (al-Ma'idah, 5:3), is a Nass on the prohibition of these
items for human consumption.[13. Badran, Usul , p. 403; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 94.] As already stated, the Nass, like the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 91Zahir, is open to ta'wil and abrogation. For example, the absolute terms of the ayah which we just
quoted on the prohibition of dead carcasses and blood have been qualified elsewhere in the Qur'an
where 'blood' has been qualified as 'blood shed forth' (al-An'am, 6:145).  Similarly, there is a Hadith
which permits consumption of two types of dead carcasses, namely fish and locust.[14. Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 1203,
Hadith no. 4132.] (See full version of this Hadith on page 131.) Another example of the Nass which has been
subjected to ta'wil is the Hadith concerning the legal alms (zakah) of livestock, which simply provides
that this shall be 'one in every forty sheep'. [15. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 410, Hadith no. 1567.] 
The obvious Nass of this Hadith admittedly requires that the animal itself should be given in zakah . But
it would seem in harmony with the basic purpose of the law to say that either the sheep or their
equivalent monetary value may be given. For the purpose of zakah is to satisfy the needs of the poor,
and this could equally be done by giving them the equivalent amount of money; it is even likely that
they might prefer this.[16. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 165; Amidi ( Ihkam , III, 57) considers this to be a ta'wil  which is far-fetched.] The Hanafis have
offered a similar interpretation for two other Qur'anic ayat, one on the expiation of futile oaths, and the
other on the expiation of deliberate breaking of the fast during Ramadan. The first is enacted at feeding
ten poor persons (al-Ma'idah, 5:92), and the second at feeding sixty such persons (al-Mujadalah, 58:4).
The Hanafis have held that this text can be implemented either by feeding ten needy persons or by
feeding one such person on ten occasions. Similarly, the provision in the second ayah may be
understood, according to the Hanafis, to mean feeding sixty poor persons, or one such person sixty
times. [17. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 166. ]As already stated, Nass is stronger than Zahir, and should there be a conflict between them, the former
prevails over the latter. This may be illustrated in the following two Qur'anic passages, one of which is
a Nass in regard to the prohibition of wine, and the other a Zahir in regard to the permissibility of eating
and drinking in general. The two passages are as follows:
O believers! Intoxicants, games of chance and sacrificing to stones and arrows are the
unclean works of Satan So avoid them . . . (al-Ma'idah, 5:93).
On those who believe and do good deeds, there is no blame for what they consume
while they keep their duty and believe and do good deeds (al-Ma'idah, 5:96)

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 92The Nass in the first ayah is the prohibition of wine, which is the main purpose and theme of the text.
The Zahir in the second ayah is the permissibility of eating and drinking without restriction. The main
purpose of the second ayah is, however, to accentuate the virtue of piety (taqwa) in that taqwa is not a
question of austerity with regard to food, it is rather a matter of God-consciousness and good deeds.
There is an apparent conflict between the two ayat, but since the prohibition of wine is established in
the Nass, and the permissibility regarding food and drink is in the form of Zahir, the Nass prevails over
the Zahir.  [18. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.95. ]To give an example of Zahir in modern criminal law, we may refer to the word 'night' which occurs in
many statutes in connection with theft. When theft is committed at night, it carries a heavier penalty.
Now if one takes the manifest meaning of 'night', then it means the period between sunset and sunrise.
However this meaning may not be totally harmonious with the purpose of the law. What is really meant
by 'night' is the dark of the night, which is an accentuating circumstance in regard to theft. Here the
meaning of the Zahir is qualified with reference to the rational purpose of the law and the nature of the
offence in question. [19. Cf. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 166.]I. 3 & 4 Unequivocal (Mufassar) and Perspicuous (Muhkam)Mufassar is a word or a text whose meaning is completely clear and is, in the meantime, in harmony
with the context in which it appears. Because of this and the high level of clarity in the meaning of
Mufassar, there is no need for recourse to ta'wil. But the Mufassar may still be open to abrogation
which might, in reference to the Qur'an and Sunnah, have taken place during the lifetime of the Prophet.
The idea of the Mufassar, as the word itself implies, is that the text explains itself. The Lawgiver has, in
other words, explained His own intentions with complete clarity, and the occasion for ta'wil does not
arise. The Mufassar occurs in two varieties, one being the text which is self-explained, or Mufassar
bidhatih, and the other is when the ambiguity in one text is clarified and explained by another. This is
known as Mufassar bighayrih, in which case the two texts become an integral part of one another and
the two combine to constitute a Mufassar .[20. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 96; Badran, Usul , pp. 404-405. ] An example of
Mufassar in the Qur'an is the text in sura al-Tawbah (9:36) which addresses the believers to 'fight the
pagans all together ( kaffah ) as they fight you all together'. The word 'kaffah' which occurs twice in this
text precludes the possibility of applying specification ( takhsis ) to the words preceding it, namely the
pagans ( mushrikin ). Mufassar occurs in many a modern statute with regard to specified crimes and their

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 93penalties, but also with regard to civil liabilities, the payment of damages, and debts. The words of the
statute are often self-explained and definite so as to preclude ta'wil. But the basic function of the
explanation that the text itself provides is concerned with that part of the text which is ambivalent
(mujmal) and needs to be clarified. When the necessary explanation is provided, the ambiguity is
removed and the text becomes a Mufassar. An example of this is the phrase 'laylah al-qadr' ('night of
qadr' ) in the following Qur'anic passage. The phrase is ambiguous to begin with, but is then explained:
We sent it [the Qur'an] down on the Night of Qadr. What will make you realise what
the Night of Qadr is like?[...] It is the night in which angels and the spirit descend [...]
(al-Qadr, 97:1-4).
The text thus explains the 'laylah al-qadr' and as a result of the explanation so provided, the text
becomes self-explained, or Mufassar. Hence there is no need for recourse to ta'wil. Sometimes the
ambiguous of the Qur'an is clarified by the Sunnah, and when this is the case, the clarification given by
the Sunnah becomes an integral part of the Qur'an. There are numerous examples of this, such as the
words salah, zakah, hajj, riba, which occur in the following ayat:
Perform the salah and pay the zakah (al-Nahl, 16:44)
God has enacted upon people the pilgrimage of hajj to be performed by all who are
capable of it (Al-'Imran, 3:97).
God permitted sale and prohibited usury (riba ) (al-Baqarah, 2:275).
The juridical meanings of salah, zakah, hajj and riba could not be known from the brief references that
are made to them in these ayat. Hence the Prophet provided the necessary explanation in the form of
both verbal and practical instructions. In this way the text which was initially ambivalent (mujmal)
became Mufassar. With regard to salah, for example, the Prophet instructed his followers to 'perform
the salah the way you see me performing it', and regarding the hajj he ordered them to 'take from me
the rituals of the hajj. [21. Tabrizi, Mishkat, I, 215, Hadith no. 683; Shatibi, Muwafaqat  III, 178; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.167; Badran, Usul , p. 405.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 94 
There are also many ahadith which explain the Qur'anic prohibition of riba in specific and elaborate
detail.
The value ( hukm ) of the Mufassar is that acting upon it is obligatory. The clear meaning of a Mufassar
is not open to interpretation and unless it has been abrogated, the obvious text must be followed. But
since abrogation of the Qur'an and Sunnah discontinued upon the demise of the Prophet, to all intents
and purposes, the Mufassar is equivalent to the perspicuous ( Muhkam ), which is the last in the range of
clear words and is not open to any change.
Specific words ( al-alfaz al-khassah ) which are not open to ta'wil or any change in their primary
meanings are in the nature of Mufassar. Thus the Qur'anic punishment of eighty lashes for slanderous
accusation ( qadhf ) in sura al-Nur (24:4), or the ayah of inheritance (al-Nisa', 4:11) which prescribes
specific shares for legal heirs, consist of fixed numbers which rule out the possibility of ta'wil. They all
partake in the qualities of Mufassar . [22. Badran, Usul , p. 404.]Since Mufassar is one degree stronger than Nass , in the event of a conflict between them, the Mufassar
prevails. This can be illustrated in the two hadiths concerning the ablution of a woman who experiences
irregular menstruations that last longer than the expected three days or so: she is required to perform the
salah ; as for the ablution ( wudu' ) for salah, she is instructed, according to one Hadith:
A woman in prolonged menstruations must make a fresh wudu'  for every salah: [23. Abu
Dawud, Sunan , I, 76, Hadith nos. 294, and 304 respectively.]And according to another Hadith
A woman in prolonged menstruation must make a fresh wudu' at the time of every
salah .[24. Abu Dawud, Sunan , I, 76, Hadith nos. 294, and 304 respectively. ]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 95The first Hadith is a Nass on the requirement of a fresh wudu' for every salah, but the second Hadith is
a Mufassar which does not admit of any ta'wil. The first Hadith is not completely categorical as to
whether 'every salah' applies to both obligatory and supererogatory ( fara'id wa-nawafil ) types of salah.
Supposing that they are both performed at the same time, would a separate wudu' be required for each?
But this ambiguity/ question does not arise under the second Hadith as the latter provides complete
instruction: a wudu' is only required at the time of every salah and the same wudu' is sufficient for any
number of salahs at that particular time.[25. Khallaf,  'Ilm, p. 169; Badran, Usul , p. 408.]Words and sentences whose meaning is clear beyond doubt and are not open to ta'wil and abrogation
are called Muhkam. An example of this is the frequently occurring Qur'anic statement that 'God knows
all things'. This kind of statement cannot be abrogated, either in the lifetime of the Prophet, or after his
demise. [26. Hughes, Dictionary of Islam , p.518; Badran, Usul , p. 406; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.96.] The text may sometimes explain itself
in terms that would preclude the possibility of abrogation. An example of this is the Qur'anic address to
the believers concerning the wives of the Prophet: 'It is not right for you to annoy the Messenger of
God; nor should you ever marry his widows after him. For that is truly an enormity in God's sight' (al-
Ahzab, 33:35). The prohibition here is emphasised by the word abadan (never, ever) which renders it
Muhkam, thereby precluding the possibility of abrogation. The Muhkam is, in reality, nothing other than
Mufassar with one difference, namely that Muhkam is not open to abrogation. An example of Muhkam
in the Sunnah is the ruling concerning jihad which provides that ' jihad (holy struggle) remains valid till
the day of resurrection'. [27. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 702, Hadith no. 2526; Abu Zahrah,  Usul , p. 96.] 
The ulema of usul have given the Qur'anic ayah on slanderous accusation as another example of
Muhkam, despite some differences of interpretation that have arisen over it among the Hanafi and
Shafi'i jurists. The ayah provides, concerning persons who are convicted and punished for slanderous
accusation ( qadhf ): 'And accept not their testimony ever, for such people are transgressors' (al-Nur,
24:4). Once again the occurrence of abadan ('for ever') in this text renders it Muhkam and precludes all
possibility of abrogation. The Hanafis have held that the express terms of this ayah admit of no
exception. A qadhif, that is, a slanderous accuser, may never be admitted as a witness even if he
repents. But according to the Shafi'is, if the qadhif repents after punishment, he may be admitted as a
witness. The reason for this exception, according to the Shafi'is, is given in the subsequent portion of
the same text, which reads: 'Unless they repent afterwards, and rectify themselves.' The grounds of
these differential interpretations need not be elaborated here. Suffice it to point out that the differences
are over the understanding of the pronouns in the text, whether they refer to the qadhif and transgressors

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 96both, or to the latter only. There is no difference of opinion over the basic punishment of qadhf, which
is eighty lashes as the text provides, but only with regard to the additional penalty disqualifying them as
witnesses forever. It would thus appear that these differences fall within the scope of tafsir rather than
that of ta'wil .
The Muhkam is not open to abrogation. This may be indicated in the text itself, as in the foregoing
examples, or it may be due to the absence of an abrogating text. The former is known as Muhkam
bidhatih, or Muhkam by itself, and the second as Muhkam bighayrih, or Muhkam because of another
factor. [28. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 96; Badran, Usul , p. 406.]The purpose of the foregoing distinction between the four types of clear words is to identify their
propensity or otherwise to ta'wil , that is, of admitting a meaning other than their obvious meaning, and
whether or not they are open to abrogation. If a word is not open to either of these possibilities, it would
follow that it retains its original or primary meaning and admits of no other interpretation. The present
classification, in other words, contemplates the scope of ta'wil in that the latter is applicable only to the
Zahir and Nass but not to the Mufassar and Muhkam. The next purpose of this classification is to
provide guidelines for resolving possible conflicts between the various categories of words. In this way
an order of priority is established by which the Muhkam prevails over the other three varieties of clear
words and the Mufassar takes priority over the Nass, and so on. But this order of priority applies only
when the two conflicting texts both occur in the Qur'an. However, when a conflict arises between, say,
the Zahir of the Qur'an and the Nass of the Sunnah, the former would prevail despite its being one
degree weaker in the order of priority. This may be illustrated by the ayah of the Qur'an concerning
guardianship in marriage, which is in the nature of Zahir. The ayah provides: 'If he has divorced her,
then she is not lawful to him until she marries (hatta tankiha) another man' (al-Baqarah, 2:229). This
text is Zahir in respect of guardianship as its principal theme is divorce, not guardianship. From the
Arabic form of the word 'tankiha' in this text, the Hanafis have drawn the additional conclusion that an
adult woman can contract her own marriage, without the presence of a guardian. However there is a
Hadith on the subject of guardianship which is in the nature of Nass, which provides that 'there shall be
no marriage without a guardian ( wali). [29. Abu Dawud, Sunan  (Hasan's trans.), II, 555 Hadith no. 2078; Badran, Usul , p. 408.]This Hadith is more specific on the point that a woman must be contracted in marriage by her guardian.
Notwithstanding this, however, the Zahir of the Qur'an is given priority, by the Hanafis at least, over
the Nass of the Hadith. The majority of ulema have, however, followed the ruling of the Sunnah on this
point. [30. Badran, Usul , p.409.]II. Unclear Words ( al-Alfaz Ghayr al-Wadihah )

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 97These are words which do not by themselves convey a clear meaning without the aid of additional
evidence that may be furnished by the Lawgiver Himself, or by the mujtahid. If the inherent ambiguity
is clarified by means of research and ijtihad, the words are classified as Khafi (obscure) and Mushkil
(difficult). But when the ambiguity could only be removed by an explanation which is furnished by the
Lawgiver, the word is classified either as Mujmal (ambivalent) or Mutashabih (intricate), as follows. [31.
Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.162; Badran, Usul , p. 409.]II. 1 The Obscure (Khafi )Khafi denotes a word which has a basic meaning but is partially ambiguous in respect of some of the
individual cases to which it is applied: the word is consequently obscure with regard to these cases only.
The ambiguity in Khafi needs to be clarified by extraneous evidence which is often a matter of research
and ijtihad. An example of Khafi is the word 'thief' ( sariq ) which has a basic meaning but which, when
it is applied to cases such as that of a pickpocket, or a person who steals the shrouds of the dead, does
not make it immediately clear whether 'thief' includes a pickpocket or not and whether the punishment
of theft can be applied to the latter. The basic ingredients of theft are present in this activity, but the fact
that the pickpocket uses a kind of skill in taking the assets of a person in wakefulness makes it
somewhat different from theft. Similarly, it is not certain whether 'thief' includes a nabbash, that is, one
who steals the shroud of the dead, since a shroud is not a guarded property ( mal muhraz ). Imam Shafi'i
and Abu Yusuf would apply the prescribed penalty of theft to the nabbash, whereas  the majority of
ulema only make him liable to the discretionary punishment of ta'zir . There is also an ijtihadi opinion
which authorises the application of the hadd of theft to the pickpocket. [32. Khallaf,  'Ilm, p.170; Badran, Usul , p. 410.]The word ' qatil' (killer) in the Hadith that 'the killer shall not inherit', [33. Shafi'i, Al-Risalah , p. 80.] is also Khafi
in respect of certain varieties of killing such as 'erroneous killing' ( qatl al-khata'). The malikis have held
that erroneous killing is not included in the meaning of this Hadith, whereas according to the Hanafis, it
is in the interest of safeguarding the lives of the people to include erroneous killing within the meaning
of this Hadith. [34. Badran, Usul , p. 411.] To remove the ambiguity in Khafi is usually a matter of ijtihad , which
would explain why there are divergent rulings on each of the foregoing examples. It is the duty of the
mujtahid to exert himself so as to clarify the ambiguity in the Khafi before it can constitute the basis of
a judicial order.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 98II.2 The Difficult ( Mushkil )Mushkil denotes a word which is inherently ambiguous, and whose ambiguity can only be removed by
means of research and ijtihad . The Mushkil differs from the Khafi in that the latter has a basic meaning
which is generally clear, whereas the Mushkil is inherently ambiguous. There are, for example, words
which have more than one meaning, and when they occur in a text, the text is unclear with regard to one
or the other of those meanings. Thus the word ' qur' ' which occurs in sura al-Baqarah (2:228) is Mushkil
as it has two distinct meanings: menstruation (hayd) and the clean period between two menstruations
(tuhr). Whichever of these is taken, the ruling of the text will differ accordingly. Imam Shafi'i and a
number of other jurists have adopted the latter, whereas the Hanafis and others have adopted the former
as the correct meaning of qur'.
Sometimes the difficulty arising in the text is caused by the existence of a conflicting text. Although
each of the two texts may be fairly clear as they stand alone, they become difficult when one attempts to
reconcile them. This may be illustrated in the following two ayat, one of which provides:
'Whatever good that befalls you is from God, and whatever misfortune that happens to
you' is from yourself' (al-Nisa', 4:79).
Elsewhere we read in sura Al- 'Imran (3:154): 'Say that the matter is all in God's hands.' A similar
difficulty is noted in the following two passages. According to the first, 'Verily God does not command
obscenity/evil' (al-A'raf, 7:28). And then we read in sura Bani Isra'il (17: 16), 'When We decide to
destroy a population, We first send a definite order to their privileged ones, and when they transgress,
the word is proven against them, then We destroy them with utter destruction.' Could it be said that total
destruction is a form of evil? There is no certainty as to the correct meaning of Mushkil, as it is
inherently ambiguous. Any explanation which is provided by the mujtahid is bound to be speculative.
The mujtahid is nevertheless bound to exert himself in order to discover the correct meaning of Mushkil
before it can be implemented and adopted as a basis of action. [35. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.173; Badran, Usul , p. 413.]II.3 The Ambivalent ( Mujmal )

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 99Mujmal denotes a word or text which is inherently unclear and gives no indication as to its precise
meaning. The cause of ambiguity in Mujmal is inherent in the locution itself. A word may be a
homonym with more than one meaning, and there is no indication as to which might be the correct one,
or alternatively the Lawgiver has given it a meaning other than its literal one, or the word may be totally
unfamiliar. In any of these eventualities, there is no way of removing the ambiguity without recourse to
the explanation that the Lawgiver has furnished Himself, for He introduced the ambiguous word in the
first place. Words that have been used in a transferred sense, that is, for a meaning other than their
literal one, in order to convey a technical or a juridical concept, fall under the category of Mujmal. For
example, expressions such as salah , riba , hajj, and siyam have all lost their literal meanings due to the
fact that the Lawgiver has used them for purposes other than those which they originally conveyed.
Each of these words has a literal meaning, but since their technical meaning is so radically different
from the literal, the link between them is lost and the technical meaning becomes totally dominant. A
word of this type remains ambivalent until it is clarified by the Lawgiver Himself. The juridical
meaning of all the Qur'anic words cited above has been explained by the Prophet, in which case, they
cease to be ambivalent. For when the Lawgiver provides the necessary explanation, the Mujmal is
explained and turns into Mufassar.
The Mujmal may sometimes be an unfamiliar word which is inherently vague, but is clarified by the
text where it occurs. For example 'al-qari'ah' and 'halu ' which  occur in the Qur'an. The relevant
passages are as follows:
The stunning blow ( al-qari'ah )! What is the stunning blow? What will make you realise
what the stunning blow is? It is the Day on which the people will act like scattered
moths; and the mountains will be like carded wool (al-Qari'ah, 101:1-5).
Truly man was created restless ( halu'an ); so he panics whenever any evil touches him;
and withholds when some fortune befalls him (al-Ma'arij, 70:20-23).
The ambivalent words in these passages have thus been explained and the text has as a result become
self-explained, or Mufassar. The Mujmal turns into the Mufassar only when the clarification that the
Lawgiver provides is complete; but when it is incomplete, or insufficient to remove the ambiguity, the
Mujmal turns into a Mushkil, which is then open to research and ijtihad. An example of this is the word
riba which occurs in the Qur'an (al-Baqarah, 2:275) in the form of a Mujmal, as when it reads: 'God

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 100permitted sale and prohibited riba', the last word in this text literally meaning 'increase'. Since not every
increase or profit is unlawful, the text remains ambivalent as to what type of increase it intends to
forbid. The Prophet has clarified the basic concept of riba in the Hadith which specifies six items (gold,
silver, wheat, barley, salt and dates) to which the prohibition applies. But this explanation is insufficient
for detailed purposes in that it leaves room for reflection and enquiry as to the rationale of the text with
a view to extending the same rule to similar commodities. The Hadith thus opens the way to further
ijtihad and analogy to the goods that it has specified. [36. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , I, 252, Hadith no. 949; Khallaf,  'Ilm, pp.173-175;
Badran, Usul , pp. 414-415.]II.4 The Intricate ( Mutashabih )This denotes a word whose meaning is a total mystery. There are words in the Qur'an whose meaning is
not known at all. Neither the words themselves nor the text in which they occur provide any indication
as to their meaning. The Mutashabih as such does not occur in the legal nusus , but it does occur in other
contexts. Some of the suras of the Qur'an begin with what is called al-muqatta'at , that is, abbreviated
letters whose meaning is a total mystery. Expressions such as alif-lam-mim, ya-sin, ha-mim and many
others which occur on 29 occasions in the Qur'an, are all classified as Mutashabih. Some ulema have
held the view that the muqatta'at are meant to exemplify the inimitable qualities of the Qur'an, while
others maintain that they are not abbreviations but symbols and names of God; that they have numerical
significance; and that they are used to attract the attention of the audience. According to yet another
view, the Mutashabih in the Qur'an is meant as a reminder of limitations in the knowledge of the
believer, who is made to realise that the unseen realities are too vast to be comprehended by reason. [37.
The Holy Qur'an  (Yusuf Ali's trans.) p. 118; Denffer, 'Ulum, p. 84; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 100. ]Some ulema, including Ibn Hazm al-Zahiri, have held the view that with the exception of the muqatta'at
there is no Mutashabih in the Qur'an. Others have maintained that the passages of the Qur'an which
draw resemblances between God and man are also in the nature of Mutashabih .[38. Badran, Usul , p. 416.] Thus
the ayat which provide: 'the hand of God is over their hands' (al-Fath, 48:10); and in a reference to the
Prophet Noah where we read: 'build a ship under Our eyes and Our inspiration' (Hud, 11:37) and in sura
al-Rahman (55:27) where the text runs 'and the face of your Lord will abide forever', are instances of
Mutashabih as their precise meaning cannot be known. One can of course draw an appropriate
metaphorical meaning in each case, which is what the Mu'tazilah have attempted, but this is neither
satisfactory nor certain. To say that 'hand' metaphorically means power, and 'eyes' means supervision is
no more than a conjecture. For we do not know the subject of our comparison. The Qur'an also tells us

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 101that 'there is nothing like Him' (al-Shura, 42:11). Since the Lawgiver has not explained these
resemblances to us, they remain unintelligible. [39. Khallaf,  'Ilm, p. 176. ]The existence of the Mutashabih in the Qur'an is proven by the testimony of the Book itself, which is as
follows:
He it is who has sent down to you the Book. Some of it consist of Muhkamat , which are
the Mother of the Book, while others are Mutashabihat. Those who have swerving in
their hearts, in their quest for sedition, follow the Mutashabihat and search for its
hidden meanings. But no one knows those meanings except God. And those who are
firmly grounded in knowledge say: We believe in it, the whole is from our Lord. But
only people of inner understanding really heed. (Al-'Imran, 3:7).
The ulema have differed in their understanding of this ayah, particularly with regard to the definition of
Muhkamat and Mutashabihat. But the correct view is that Muhkam is that part of the Qur'an which is
not open to conjecture and doubt, whereas the Mutashabih is. With regard to the letters which appear at
the beginning of suras, it has been suggested that they are the names of the suras in which they occur.
As for the question of whether acting upon the Mutashabih is permissible or not, there is disagreement,
but the correct view is that no one may act upon it. This is so not because the Mutashabih has no
meaning, but because the correct meaning is not known to any human being. [40. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 68. ] There
is no doubt that all the Mutashabihat have a meaning, but it is only known to God, and we must not
impose our estimations on the words of God in areas where no indication is available to reveal the
correct meaning to us. [41. Shawkani, Irshad , pp.31-32.]Classification II: The 'Amm (General) and the Khass (Specific).From the viewpoint of their scope, words are classified into the 'general' and the 'specific'. This is
basically a conceptual distinction which is not always obvious in the grammatical forms of words,
although the ulema have identified certain linguistic patterns of words which assist us in differentiating
the 'Amm from the Khass .

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 102'Amm may be defined as a word which applies to many things, not limited in number, and includes
everything to which it is applicable. [42. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 12; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 79. ] An example of this is
the word 'insan' (human being) in the Qur'anic ayah, 'verily the human being is in loss' (al-'Asr, 103:1),
or the command, 'whoever enters this house, give him a dirham'. In both examples the application of
'human being' and 'whoever' is general and includes every human being without any limitation. 'Amm is
basically a word that has a single meaning, but which applies to an unlimited number without any
restrictions. All words, whether in Arabic or any other language, are basically general, and unless they
are specified or qualified in some way, they retain their generality. According to the reported ijma' of
the Companions and the accepted norms of Arabic, the words of the Qur'an and Sunnah apply in their
general capacity unless there is evidence to warrant a departure from the general to an alternative
meaning. [43. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 178; Badran, Usul , p. 375.] To say that the 'Amm has a single meaning differentiates the
'Amm from the homonym (Mushtarak) which has more than one meaning. Similarly, the statement that
the 'Amm applies to an unlimited number precludes the Khass from the definition of 'Amm . [44. Badran, Usul ,
p. 370.] A word may be general either by its form, such as men, students, judges, etc., or by its meaning
only, such as people, community, etc., or by way of substitution, such as by prefixing pronouns like all,
every, entire, etc., to common nouns. Thus the Qur'anic ayah which provides that 'every soul shall taste
of death' (Al-'Imran, 3: 185), or the statement that 'every contract consists of two parties' are both
general in their import.
The 'Amm must include everything to which it is applicable. Thus when a command is issued in the
form of an 'Amm it is essential that it is implemented as such. In this way, if A commands his servant to
give a dirham to everyone who enters his house, the proper fulfillment of this command would require
that the servant does not specify the purport of A's command to, say, A's relatives only. If the servant
gives a dirham only to A's relatives with the explanation that he understood that this was what A had
wanted, the explanation would be unacceptable and the servant would be at fault.
When a word is applied to a limited number of things, including everything to which it can be applied,
say one or two or a hundred, it is referred to as 'specific' ( Khass ). A word of this kind may denote
particular individual such as Ahmad, or Zayd, or an individual belonging to a certain species such as a
horse or a bird, or an individual belonging to a genus such as a human being. [45. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p.79.]As opposed to the general, the specific word applies to a limited number, be it a genus, or a species, or a
particular individual. So long as it applies to a single subject, or specified number thereof, it is Khass .
But if there is no such limitation to the scope of its application, it is classified as 'Amm.
Legal rules which are conveyed in specific terms are definite in application and are normally not open
to ta'wil. Thus the Qur'anic ayah which enacts the 'feeding of ten poor persons' as the expiation for
futile oaths is specific and definite in that the number 'ten' does not admit of any ta'wil. However, if

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 103there be exceptional reasons to warrant recourse to ta'wil, then the Khass may be open to it. For
example, the requirement to feed ten poor persons in the foregoing ayah has been interpreted by the
Hanafis as either feeding ten persons or one such person ten times. The Hanafis have, however, been
overruled by the majority on this point who say that the Khass , as a rule, is not amenable to ta'wil.
In determining the scope of the 'Amm, reference is made not only to the rules of the language but also to
the usage of the people, and should there be a conflict between the two priority is given to the latter.
The Arabs normally use words in their general sense. But this statement must be qualified by saying
that linguistic usage has many facets. Words are sometimes used in the form of 'Amm but the purpose of
the speaker may actually be less than 'Amm or even Khass. The precise scope of the 'Amm has thus to be
determined with reference to the conditions of the speaker and the context of the speech. When, for
example, a person says that ' honoured the people' or 'I fought the enemy forces', he must surely mean
only those whom he met. 'Amm as a rule applies to all that it includes especially when it is used on its
own. But when it is used in combination with other words, then there are two possibilities: either the
'Amm remains as before, or it is specified by other words. [46. Shatibi,  Muwafaqat , III, 154.]It thus appears that there are three types of 'Amm, which are a follows: Firstly, the 'Amm which is
absolutely general, which may be indicated by a prefix in the form of a pronoun. Note for example the
Qur'anic ayat, 'there is no living creature on earth [ wa ma min dabbatin fi'l-ard ] that God does not
provide for' (Hud, 11:6); and 'We made everything [ kulla shay'in ] alive from water' (al-Anbiya', 21:30).
In the first ayah, the prefix 'ma min' ('no one', 'no living creature'), and in the second ayah, the word
'kull' (i.e. 'all' or 'every') are expressions which identify the 'Amm . Both of these ayat consist of general
propositions which preclude specification of any kind. Hence they remain absolutely general and
include all to which they apply without any exception. Secondly, there is the 'Amm which is meant to
imply a Khass. This usage of 'Amm is also indicated by evidence which suggests that the 'Amm
comprises some but not absolutely all the individuals to whom it could possibly apply. An example of
this is the word ' al-nas ' ('the people') in the Qur'anic ayah , 'pilgrimage to the House is a duty owed to
God by all people who are able to undertake it' (Al-'Imran, 3:97). Here the indications provided by the
text imply that children and lunatics or anyone who cannot afford to perform the required duty are not
included in the scope of this ayah  Thirdly, there is the 'Amm which is not accompanied by either of the
foregoing two varieties of indications as to its scope. An example of this is the Qur'anic word al-
mutallaqat ('divorced women') in the text which provides that 'divorced women must observe three
courses upon themselves' (al-Baqarah, 2:228). This type of 'Amm is Zahir  in respect of its generality,
which means that it remains general unless there is evidence to justify specification ( takhsis ). In this
instance, however, there is another Qur'anic ruling which qualifies the general requirement of the
waiting period, or 'iddah , that the divorced women must observe. This ruling occurs in sura al-Ahzab
(33:49) which is as follows: 'O believers! When you enter the contract of marriage with believing
women and then divorce them before consummating the marriage, they do not have to observe any
'iddah '. In this way, women who are divorced prior to consummating the marriage are excluded from

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 104the general requirement of the first ayah . The second ayah , in other words, specifies the first. [47. Badran,
Usul , pp. 386-387; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 185.]In grammatical terms, the 'Amm in its Arabic usage takes a variety of identifiable forms. The
grammatical forms in which the  'Amm occurs are, however, numerous, and owing to the dominantly
linguistic and Arabic nature of the subject, I shall only attempt to explain some of the well-known
patterns of the 'Amm .
When a singular or a plural form of a noun is preceded by the definite article al it is identified as 'Amm .
For example the Qur'anic text which provides, 'the adulterer, whether a woman or a man, flog them one
hundred lashes' (al-Nur, 24:2). Here the article al preceding 'adulterer' ( al-zaniyah wa'l-zani ) indicates
that all adulterers must suffer the prescribed punishment. Similarly, when the plural form of a noun is
preceded by al, it is identified as 'Amm . The example that we gave above relating to the waiting period
of the divorced women ( al-mutallaqat ) is a case in point. The ayah  in question begins by the word ' al-
mutallaqat ', that is, 'the divorced women' [48. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 182 ff; Badran, Usul , p. 371 ff; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 86 ff.]who are required to observe a waiting period of three courses before they can marry again. 'The
divorced women' is an 'Amm which comprises all to whom this expression can apply.
The Arabic expressions jami' , kaffah and kull ('all', 'entire'), are generic in their effect, and when they
precede or succeed a word, the latter comprises all to which it is applicable. We have already illustrated
the occurrence of 'kull' in the Qur'anic text where we read 'We made everything [ kulla  shay'in ] alive
from water'. The word jami' has a similar effect when it precedes or follows another word. Thus the
Qur'anic text which reads, 'He has created for you all that is in the earth' [ khalaqa lakum ma fi'l-ard
jami'a ] (al-Baqarah, 2:29) means that everything in the earth is created for the benefit of man.
Similarly, when a word, usually a plural noun, is prefixed by a conjunctive such as walladhina ('those
men who') and  wallati ('those women who'), it becomes generic in its effect. An example of this in the
Qur'an occurs in sura al-Nur (24:21): 'Those who [ walladhina ] accuse chaste women of adultery and
fail to bring four witnesses, flog them eighty lashes.' This ruling is general as it applies to all those who
can possibly be included in its scope, and it remains so unless there is evidence to warrant specification.
As it happens, this ruling has, in so far as it relates to the proof of slanderous accusation, been specified
by a subsequent ayah in the same passage. This second ayah  makes an exception in the case of the
husband who is allowed to prove a charge of adultery against his wife by taking four solemn oaths
instead of four witnesses, but the wife can rebut the charge by taking four solemn oaths herself (al-Nur,
24:6).  The general ruling of the first ayah  has thus been qualified insofar as it concerns a married
couple.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 105An indefinite word ( al-nakirah ) when used to convey the negative is also generic in its effect. For
instance the Hadith la darar wa la dirar fi'l-Islam ('no harm shall be inflicted or reciprocated in Islam')
is general in its import, as 'la darar' and 'la dirar' are both indefinite words which convey their concepts
in the negative, thereby negating all to which they apply.
The word 'man' ('he who') is specific in its application, but when used in a conditional speech, it has the
effect of a general word. To illustrate this in the Qur'an, we may refer to the text which provides:
'Whoever [ wa-man ] kills a believer in error, must release a believing slave' (al-Nisa', 4:92); and
'Whoever [ fa-man ] among you sees the new moon must observe the fast' (al-Baqarah, 2:185).
There is general agreement to the effect that the Khass is definitive ( qat'i) in its import, but the ulema
have differed as to whether the 'Amm is definitive or speculative ( zanni ). According to the Hanafis, the
application of 'Amm to all that it includes is definitive, the reason being that the language of the law is
usually general and if its application were to be confined to only a few of the cases covered by its words
without a particular reason or authority to warrant such limited application, the intention of the
Lawgiver would be frustrated.[49. Shatibi, Muwafaqat, III, 153; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.124; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence,  p. 82. ] The
majority of ulema, including the Shafi'is, Malikis and Hanbalis, maintain on the other hand that the
application of 'Amm to all that it includes is speculative as it is open to limitation and ta'wil, and so long
as there is such a possibility, it is not definitive. The result of this disagreement becomes obvious in the
event of a conflict between the 'Amm of the Qur'an and the Khass of the Hadith, especially the weak or
the solitary Hadith. According to the majority view, a solitary Hadith may specify a general provision
of the Qur'an, for the 'Amm of Qur'an is zanni and the Khass of a solitary Hadith, although definitive in
meaning, is of speculative authenticity. A zanni may be specified by a qat'i or another zanni .[50. Abu Zahrah,
Usul , p.125; Badran, Usul, p.381.] To the Hanafis, however, the 'Amm of Qur'an is definite, and the solitary Hadith,
or qiyas for that matter, is speculative. A definitive may not be limited nor specified by a speculative.
The two views may be illustrated with reference to the Qur'anic text concerning the slaughter of
animals, which provides 'eat not [of meat] on which God's name has not been pronounced' (al-An'am, 6:
121). In conjunction with this general ruling, there is a solitary Hadith which provides that 'the believer
slaughters in the name of God whether he pronounces the name of God or not'. [51. Bayhaqi, Al-Sunan al-Kubra , VII,
240; Badran, Usul , p.383.]According to the majority, this Hadith specifies the Qur'anic ayah, with the result that slaughter by a
Muslim, even without pronouncing the name of God, is lawful for consumption. But to the Hanafis, it is
not lawful, as the 'Amm of the Qur'an may not be specified by solitary ( Ahad ) Hadith. This
disagreement between the juristic schools, however, arises in respect of the solitary Hadith only. As for

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 106the Mutawatir (and the Mashhur) there is no disagreement on the point that either of these may specify
the general in the Qur'an just as the Qur'an itself sometimes specifies its own general provisions. [52.
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 157; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.125.]A general proposition may be qualified either by a dependent clause, that is, a clause which occurs in
the same text, or by an independent locution. The majority of ulema consider either of these
eventualities as two varieties of takhsis. According to the Hanafis, however, an independent locution
can specify another locution only if it is established that the two locutions are chronologically parallel
to one another. but if they are not so parallel, the later in time abrogates the former, and the case is one
of abrogation rather than takhsis. In the event where the qualifying words relate to what has preceded
and do not form a complete locution by themselves, they are not regarded as independent propositions.
According to the majority, but not the Hanafis, a dependent clause may qualify a general proposition by
introducing an exception ( istithna' ), a condition ( shart ), a quality ( sifah ), or indicating the extent
(ghayah ) of the original proposition. Each of such clauses will have the effect of limiting and specifying
the operation of the general proposition. An example of specification in the form of istithna' is the
general ruling which prescribes documentation of commercial transactions that involve deferred
payments in sura al-Baqarah (2:282). This general provision is then followed, in the same ayah , by the
exception 'unless it be a transaction handled on the spot that you pass around among yourselves in
which case it will not be held against you if you did not reduce it into writing'. This second portion of
the ayah thus embodies an exception to the first. Specification ( takhsis ) in the form of a condition
(shart ) to a general proposition may be illustrated by reference to the Qur'anic text which prescribes the
share of the husband in the estate of his deceased wife. The text thus provides, 'in what your wives
leave, you are entitled to one half if they have no children' (al-Nisa' , 4:12). The application of the
general rule in the first portion of the ayah has thus been qualified by the condition which the text itself
has provided in its latter part, namely the absence of children. And then to illustrate takhsis by way of
providing a description or qualification (sifah) to a general proposition, we may refer to the Qur'anic
text regarding the prohibition of marriage with one's step-daughter where we read '[and forbidden to
you are] your step-daughters under your guardianship from your wives with whom you have
consummated the marriage' (al-Nisa', 4:23). Thus the general prohibition in the first part of the ayah has
been qualified by the description that is provided in the latter part. And lastly, to illustrate takhsis in the
form of ghayah , or specifying the extent of application of a general proposition, we may refer to the
Qur'anic text on ablutions for salah. The text prescribes the 'washing of your hands up to the elbows'
(al-Ma'idah, 5:6). Washing the hands, which is a general ruling, is thus specified in regard to the area
which must be covered in washing. Similarly when it is said 'respect your fellow citizens unless they
violate the law', the word 'citizens' includes all, but the succeeding phrase specifies the extent of the
operation of the general ruling. [53. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence, pp . 83-84; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.187; Badran, Usul , pp. 375-378.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 107When the application of a general proposition is narrowed down, not by a clause which is part of the
general locution itself, but by an independent locution, the latter may consist of a separate text, or of a
reference to the general requirements of reason, social custom, or the objectives of Shari'ah (hikmah al-
tashri' ). It is by virtue of reason, for example, that infants and lunatics are excluded from the scope of
the Qur'anic obligation of hajj, which occurs in sura Al-'Imran (3:97). Similarly, the general text of the
Qur'an which reads that '[a wind] will destroy everything by the command of its Lord' (al-Ahqaf,
46:25), customarily denotes everything which is capable of destruction. Similarly, in the area of
commercial transactions, the general provisions of the law are often qualified in the light of the custom
prevailing among people. We have already illustrated specification of one text by another in regard to
the waiting period ( 'iddah ) of divorced women. The general provision that such women must observe a
'iddah consisting of three menstrual cycles occurs in sura al-Baqarah (2:228). This has in turn been
qualified by another text in sura al-Ahzab (33:49) which removes the requirement of 'iddah in cases
where divorce takes place prior to the consummation of marriage.[54. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 128; Abdur Rahim,
Jurisprudence, p. 84; Badran, Usul , p. 379.] And lastly, the general provision of the Qur'an concerning retaliation in
injuries on an 'equal for equal' basis (al-Ma'idah, 5:48) is qualified in the light of the objectives of the
Lawgiver in the sense that the offender is not to be physically wounded in the manner that he injured
his victim, but is to be punished in proportion to the gravity of his offence.
Next, there arises the question of chronological order between the general and the specifying
provisions. The specifying clause is either parallel in origin to the general, or is of later origin, or their
chronological order is unknown. According to the Hanafis, when the specifying clause is of a later
origin than the general proposition, the former abrogates the latter and is no longer regarded as takhsis,
but as a partial abrogation of one text by another. According to the Hanafis, takhsis can only take place
when the 'Amm and the Khass are chronologically parallel to one another; in cases where this order
cannot be established between them, they are presumed to be parallel. The difference between
abrogation and takhsis is that abrogation consists of a total or partial suspension of a ruling at a later
date, whereas takhsis essentially limits the application of the 'Amm ab initio . To the majority of ulema
takhsis is a form of explanation (bayan) in all of its varieties, but to the Hanafis it is a form of bayan
only when the specifying clause is independent of the general proposition, chronologically parallel to it,
and is of the same degree of strength as the 'Amm in respect of being a qat'i or a zanni. But when the
specifying clause is of a later origin than the general proposition, the effect which it has on the latter,
according to the Hanafis, is one of abrogation rather than bayan. [55. Badran, Usul , p. 376.] The majority view on
takhsis thus differs from the Hanafis in that takhsis according to the majority may be by means of both
a dependent or an independent locution, and the specifying clause need not be chronologically parallel
to the general proposition. This is because in the majority opinion, the specifying clause explains and
does not abrogate or invalidate the general proposition.[56. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 128-129.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 108Notwithstanding the ulema's disagreement regarding the nature of takhsis, it would appear that takhsis
is not a partial invalidation of the 'Amm, but an explanation or qualification thereof. This is the majority
view, and seems to be preferable to the Hanafi view which equates takhsis with partial abrogation.[57. Abu
Zahrah, Usul , p. 129. ] Imam Ghazali discusses the Hanafi position at some length, and refutes it by saying that
a mere discrepancy in time does not justify the conclusion that takhsis changes its character into
abrogation. Nor is it justified to say that a discrepancy in the strength of the indication (dalil)
determines the difference between takhsis and abrogation.[58. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 103-105.]The effect of 'Amm is that it remains in force, and action upon it is required, unless there is a specifying
clause which would limit its application. In the event where a general provision is partially specified, it
still retains its legal authority in respect of the part which remains unspecified. According to the
majority of ulema, the 'Amm is speculative as a whole, whether before or after takhsis, and as such it is
open to qualification and ta'wil in either case. For the Hanafis, however, the 'Amm is definitive in the
first place, but when it is partially specified, it becomes speculative in respect of the part which still
remains unspecified; hence it will be treated as zanni and would be susceptible to further specification
by another zanni. [59. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 183; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 129.]As for the question of whether the cause of a general ruling can operate as a limiting factor in its
general application, it will be noted that the cause never specifies a general ruling. This is relevant, as
far as the Qur'an is concerned, to the question of asbab al-nuzul, or the occasions of its revelation. One
often finds general rulings in the Qur'an which were revealed with reference to specific issues. Whether
the cause of the revelation contemplated a particular situation or not, it does not operate as a limiting
factor on the application of the general ruling. Thus the occasion of the revelation of the ayah of
imprecation (li'an) in sura al-Nur (24:6) was a complaint that a resident of Madinah, Hilal ibn
Umayyah, made to the Prophet about the difficulty experienced by the spouse in proving, by four
eyewitnesses, the act of adultery on the part of the other spouse. The cause of the revelation was
specific but the ruling remains general. Similarly, the Hadith which provides that 'when any hide is
tanned, it is purified' [60. Abu Dawud, Sunan (Hasan's trans.), II, 1149; Hadith no. 4111; Abu Zabrah, Usul , p. 130.] 
was, according to reports, uttered with reference to a sheepskin, but the ruling is nevertheless applicable
to all types of skins. The actual wording of a general ruling is therefore to be taken into consideration
regardless of its cause. If the ruling is conveyed in general terms, it must be applied as such even if the
cause behind it happens to be specific. [61. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.130; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 189.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 109Conflict between 'Amm and KhassShould there be two textual rulings on one and the same subject in the Qur'an, one being 'Amm and the
other Khass, there will be a case of conflict between them according to the Hanafis, but not according to
the majority. The reason is that to the Hanafis, 'Amm and Khass are both definitive (qat'i) and as such a
conflict between them is possible, whereas to the majority, only the Khass is qat'i and it would always
prevail over the 'Amm, which is z anni.
The Hanafis maintain that in the event of a conflict between the general and the specific in the Qur'an,
one must ascertain the chronological order between them first; whether, for example, they are both
Makki or Madani ayat or whether one is Makki and the other Madani. If the two happen to be parallel
in time, the Khass specifies the 'Amm. If a different chronological sequence can be established between
them, then if the 'Amm is of a later origin, it abrogates the Khass, but if the Khass is later, it only
partially abrogates the 'Amm. This is because the Hanafis maintain that the Khass specifies the 'Amm
only when they are chronologically parallel, both are qat'i, and both are independent locutions.
The majority of ulema, as already noted, do not envisage the possibility of a conflict between the 'Amm
and the Khass : when there are two rulings on the same point, one being 'Amm and the other Khass, the
latter becomes explanatory to the former and both are retained. For the majority, the 'Amm is like the
Zahir  in that both are speculative and both are open to qualification and ta'wil .[62.Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 131; Badran,
Usul , p. 383.]The two foregoing approaches to takhsis may be illustrated by the conflict arising in the following two
ahadith  concerning legal alms ( zakah ). One of these provides, 'whatever is watered by the sky is subject
to a tithe'.
 
The second Hadith provides that 'there is no charity in less than five awsaq '. [63. Al-Tabrizi, Mishkat, I, 563-65, Hadith
nos. 1794 & 1797; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 131.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 110 
A wasaq  (sing. of awsaq ) is a quantitative measure equivalent to about ten kilograms. The first Hadith
contains a general ruling in respect of any quantity of agricultural crops, but the second Hadith is
specific on this point. The majority of ulema (including the Shafi'is) have held that the second Hadith
explains and qualifies the first. The first Hadith lays down the general principle and the second enacts
the quorum ( nisab ) of zakah . For the Hanafis, however, the first Hadith abrogates the second, as they
consider that the first Hadith is of a later origin than the second. According to the Hanafis, when the
'Amm is of a later origin than the Khass , the former abrogates the latter completely. Hence there is no
case for takhsis and the Hanafis as a result impose no minimum quantitative limit with regard to zakah
on produce obtained through dry farming. The two views remain far apart, and there is no meeting
ground between them. However, as already indicated, the majority opinion is sound, and recourse to
abrogation in cases of conflict between the 'Amm and Khass is often found to be unnecessary. In
modern law too one often notices that the particular usually qualifies the general, and the two can co-
exist. The 'Amm and the Khass can thus each operate in their respective spheres with or without a
discrepancy in their time of origin and the degree of their respective strength. [64. Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 132.]Classification III: The Absolute ( Mutlaq ) and the Qualified ( Muqayyad )Mutlaq denotes  a word which is neither qualified nor limited in its application. When we say, for
example, a 'book', a 'bird' or a 'man', each one is a generic noun which applies to any book, bird or man
without any restriction. In its original state, the Mutlaq is unspecified and unqualified. The Mutlaq
differs from the 'Amm, however, in that the latter comprises all to which it applies whereas the former
can apply to any one of a multitude, but not to all.[65. Khallaf,  'Ilm, p. 192; Badran, Usul , pp.351, 371. ] However, the
ulema have differed regarding the Mutlaq and the Muqayyad. To some ulema, including al-Baydawi,
the Mutlaq resembles the 'Amm, and the Muqayyad resembles the Khass. Hence anything which
specifies the 'Amm can qualify the Mutlaq. Both are open to ta'wil and Mutlaq /Muqayyad are
complementary to 'Amm /Khass respectively. [66. Ansari, Ghayat al-Wusul , p. 84.] When the Mutlaq is qualified by
another word or words it becomes a Muqayyad, such as qualifying 'a book' as 'a green book', or 'a bird'
as 'a huge bird' or 'a man' as 'a wise man'. The Muqayyad differs from the Khass in that the former is a
word which implies an unspecified individual/s who is merely distinguished by certain attributes and
qualifications. An example of Mutlaq in the Qur'an is the expiation (kaffarah ) of futile oaths, which is
freeing a slave (fa-tahriru raqabatin) in sura al-Ma'idah, (5:92). The command in this text is not limited
to any kind of slaves, whether Muslim or non-Muslim. Yet in another Qur'anic passage the expiation of
erroneous killing consists of 'freeing a Muslim slave' (fa-tahriru raqabatin mu'minatin) (al-Nisa', 4:92).

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 111In contrast to the first text, which is conveyed in absolute terms, the command in the second ayah is
qualified in that the slave to be released must be a Muslim.
The Mutlaq remains absolute in its application unless there is a limitation to qualify it. Thus the
Qur'anic prohibition of marriage 'with your wives' mothers' in sura al-Nisa' (4:23) is conveyed in
absolute terms, and as such, marriage with one's mother-in-law is forbidden regardless as to whether the
marriage with her daughter has been consummated or not. Since there is no indication to qualify the
terms of the Qur'anic command, it is to be implemented as it is. But when a Mutlaq is qualified into a
Muqayyad, the latter is to be given priority over the former. Thus if we have two texts on one and the
same subject, and both convey the same ruling ( hukm ) as well as both having the same cause ( sabab )
but one is Mutlaq and the other Muqayyad, the latter prevails over the former. To illustrate this in the
Qur'an, we refer to the two ayat on the prohibition of blood for human consumption. The first of these,
which occurs in absolute terms, provides, 'forbidden to you are the dead carcass and blood' (al-Ma'idah,
5:3). But elsewhere in the Qur'an there is another text on the same subject which qualifies the word
'blood' as 'blood shed forth' ( daman masfuhan ) (al-An'am, 6:145). This second ayah is a Muqayyad
whereas the first is Mutlaq, hence the Muqayyad prevails. It will be noted here that the two texts convey
the same ruling, namely prohibition, and that they have the same cause or subject in common (i.e.
consumption of blood). When this is the case, the ulema are in agreement that the Muqayyad qualifies
the Mutlaq and prevails over it.[67. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.193; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , pp. 91-92. ]However if there are two texts on the same issue, one absolute and the other qualified, but they differ
with one another in their rulings and in their causes, or in both, then neither is qualified by the other and
each will operate as it stands. This is the view of the Hanafi and Maliki schools, and the Shafi'is concur
insofar as it relates to two texts which differ both in their respective rulings and their causes. However
the Shafi'is maintain the view that if the two texts vary in their ruling ( hukm ) but have the same cause in
common, the Mutlaq is qualified by the Muqayyad. This may be illustrated by referring to the two
Qur'anic ayat concerning ablution, one of which reads, in an address to the believers, to 'wash your
faces and your hands [ aydikum ] up to the elbows' (al-Ma'idah, 5:7). The washing of hands in this ayah
has been qualified by the succeeding phrase, that is 'up to the elbows'. The second Qur'anic provision
which we are about to quote occurs in regard to tayammum, that is, ablution with clean sand in the
event where no water can be found, in which case the Qur'an provides, 'take clean sand/earth and wipe
your faces and your hands' (al-Nisal, 4:43). The word 'aydikum' (your hands) occurs as a Muqayyad in
the first text but as a Mutlaq in the second. However the two texts have the same cause in common,
which is cleanliness for salah . There is admittedly a difference between the two rulings, in that the first
requires washing, and the second wiping, of the hands, but this difference is of no consequence. The
first is a Muqayyad in regard to the area of the hands to be washed whereas the second is conveyed in

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 112absolute terms. The second is therefore qualified by the first, and the Muqayyad prevails. Consequently
in wiping the hands in tayammum, too, one is required to wipe them up to the elbows.
And lastly we give another illustration, again of two texts, one Mutlaq, the other Muqayyad, both of
which convey the same ruling but differ in respect of their causes. Here we refer to the two Qur'anic
ayat on the subject of witnesses. One of these, which requires the testimony of two witness in all
commercial transactions, is conveyed in absolute terms, whereas the second is qualified. The first of the
two texts does not qualify the word 'men' when it provides 'and bring two witnesses from among your
men' (al-Baqarah, 2:282). But the second text on same subject, that is, of witnesses, conveys a qualified
command when it provides and bring two just witnesses [when you revoke a divorce]' (al-Talaq, 65:2).
The ruling in both of these texts is the same, namely the requirement of two witnesses, but the two
rulings differ in respect of their causes. The cause of the first text, as already noted, is commercial
transactions which must accordingly be testified to by two men; whereas the cause of the second ruling
is the revocation of talaq. In the first ayah witnesses are not qualified, but they are qualified in the
second ayah. The latter prevails over the former. Consequently, witnesses in both commercial
transactions and the revocation of talaq must be upright and just. [68. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.194; Badran, Usul , p.354.]The foregoing basically represents the majority opinion. But the Hanafis maintain that when the
Muqayyad and the Mutlaq differ in their causes, the one does not qualify the other and that each should
be implemented independently. The Hanafis basically recognise only one case where the Muqayyad
qualifies the Mutlaq, namely when both convey the same ruling and have the same cause in common.
But when they differ in either of these respects or in both, then each must stand separately. In this way
the Hanafis do not agree with the majority in regard to the qualification of the area of the arms to be
wiped in tayammum by the same terms which apply to ablution by water ( wudu' ). The Hanafis argue
that the hukm in regard to tayammum is conveyed in absolute terms and must operate as such. They
contend that unlike wudu' , tayammum is a shar'i concession, and the spirit of concession should prevail
in the determination of its detailed requirements, including the area of the arm that is to be wiped.[69.
Khallaf, 'Ilm, pp. 193-194.]Classification IV: The Literal ( Haqiqi ) and the Metaphorical ( Majazi )A word may be used in its literal sense, that is, for its original or primary meaning, or it may be used in
a secondary and metaphorical sense. When a word is applied literally, it keeps its original meaning, but
when it is used in a metaphorical sense, it is transferred from its original to a secondary meaning on

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 113grounds of a relationship between the two meanings.[70. Abdur Rahi m, Jurisprudence , p. 93; Badran, Usul , p. 394.] There is
normally a logical connection between the literal and the metaphorical meanings of a word. The nature
of this relationship varies and extends over a wide range of possibilities. There are at least thirty to forty
variations in how the metaphorical usage of a word may relate to its literal meaning.[71. See for details Shawkani,
Irshad , pp. 23-24.] The metaphorical usage of a word thus consists of a transfer from the original to a
connected meaning. Once such a transfer has taken place both the original and the metaphorical
meanings of a word cannot be assigned to it at one and the same time.
Words are normally used in their literal sense, and in the language of the law it is the literal meaning
which is relied upon most. Hence if a word is simultaneously used in both these senses, the literal will
prevail. When, for example, a person says in his will that 'I bequeath my property to the memorisers of
the Qur'an' or to 'my offspring', those who might have memorised the Qur'an but have forgotten it since
will not be entitled. Similarly, 'offspring ( awlad )' primarily means sons and daughters, not
grandchildren. For applying 'awlad' to 'grandchildren' is a metaphorical usage which is secondary to its
original meaning.[72. Badran, Usul , p. 395; Hitu, Wajiz , p.115.]Both the Haqiqi and the Majazi occur in the Qur'an, and they each convey their respective meanings.
Thus when we read in the Qur'an to 'kill not [ la taqtulu ] the life which God has made sacrosanct', ' la
taqtulu' carries its literal meaning. Similarly the Majazi occurs frequently in the Qur'an. When, for
example, we read in the Qur'an that 'God sends down your sustenance from the heavens' (Ghafir,
40:13), this means rain which causes the production of food. Some ulema have observed that Majazi is
in the nature of a homonym which could comprise what may be termed as falsehood or that which has
no reality and truth, and that falsehood has no place in the Qur'an. Imam Ghazali discusses this
argument in some length and represents the majority view when he refutes it and acknowledges the
existence of the Majazi in the Qur'an. The Qur'anic expression, for example, that 'God is the light of the
heavens and the earth' (al-Nur, 24:35) and 'whenever they [the Jews] kindled the fire of war, God
extinguished it' (al-Ma'idah, 5:67), God being 'the light of the universe', and God having 'extinguished
the fire of war', are both metaphorical usages; and numerous other instances of the Majazi can be found
in the Qur'an.[73. Ghazali,  Mustasfa , 67-78.] As already stated, the Haqiqi and the Majazi both occur in the Qur'an,
and they each convey their respective meanings. But this is only the case where the Majazi does not
represent the dominant usage. In the event where a word has both a literal and a metaphorical meaning
and the latter is well-established and dominant, it is likely to prevail over the former. Some ulema have,
however, held the opposite view, namely that the Haqiqi would prevail in any case; and according to
yet a third view, both are to be given equal weight. But the first of these views represents the view of
the majority. To give an example, the word ' talaq ' literally means 'release' or 'removal of restriction'
(izalah al-qayd ), be it from the tie of marriage, slavery, or ownership, etc. But since the juridical

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 114meaning of talaq, which is dissolution of marriage, or divorce, has become totally dominant, it is this
meaning that is most likely to prevail, unless there be evidence to suggest otherwise.[74. Hitu , Wajiz , p. 115.]The Haqiqi is sub-divided, according to the context in which it occurs, into linguistic ( lughawi ),
customary ( urfi) and juridical ( shar'i ). The linguistic Haqiqi is a word which is used in its dictionary
meaning, such as 'lion' for that animal, and 'man' for the male gender of the human being. The
customary Haqiqi occurs in the two varieties of general and special: when a word is used in a
customary sense and the custom is absolutely common among people, the customary Haqiqi is
classified as general, that is, in accord with the general custom. An example of this in Arabic is the
word 'dabbah' which in its dictionary meaning applies to all living beings that walk on the face of the
earth, but which has been assigned a different meaning by general custom, that is, an animal walking on
four legs. But when the customary Haqiqi is used for a meaning that is common to a particular
profession or group, the customary Haqiqi is classified as special, that is, in accord with a special
custom. For example the Arabic word raf ('nominative') and nasb ('accusative') have each acquired a
technical meaning that is common among grammarians and experts in the language.
There is some disagreement as to the nature of the juridical Haqiqi, as some ulema consider this to be a
variety of the Majazi, but having said this, the juridical Haqiqi is defined as a word which is used for a
juridical meaning that the Lawgiver has given it in the first place, such as 'salah', which literally means
'supplication' but which, in its well-established juridical sense, is a particular form of worship.
Similarly, the word ' zakah  literally means 'purification', but in its juridical sense, denotes a particular
form of charity whose details are specified in the Shari'ah.[75. Badran, Usul , p.394; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 112 .]It would take us too far afield to describe the sub-divisions of the Majazi , as we are not primarily
concerned with technical linguistic detail. Suffice it to point out here that the Majazi  has also been
divided into linguistic, customary and juridical varieties. However, there is one other classification
which merits our attention. This is the division of the Haqiqi  and Majazi  into plain ( Sarih ) and allusive
(Kinayah ).
If the application of a word is such that it clearly discloses the speaker's intention, it is plain, otherwise
it is allusive. The highest degree of clarity in expression is achieved by the combination of the plain
(Sarih ) and the literal ( Haqiqi ) such as the sentence 'Ahmad bought a house', or 'Fatimah married
Ahmad'. The plain may also be combined with the metaphorical, as in the sentence 'I ate from this tree',
while it is intended to mean 'from the fruit of this tree'.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 115The 'allusive' or Kinayah  denotes a form of speech , which does not clearly disclose the intention of its
speaker. It can occur in combination with the literal or the metaphorical. When a person wishes, for
example, to confide in his colleague in front of others, he might say 'I met your friend and spoke to him
about the matter that you know'. This is a combination of the literal and the allusive in which all the
words used convey their literal meanings but where the whole sentence is allusive in that it does not
disclose the purpose of the speaker with clarity. Supposing that a man addresses his wife and tells her in
Arabic ' i'taddi ' (start counting) while intending to divorce her. This utterance is allusive, as 'counting'
literally means taking a record of numbers, but is used here in reference to counting the days of the
waiting period of 'iddah . This speech is also metaphorical in that the 'iddah which is caused by divorce
is used as a substitute for 'divorce'. It is a form of Majazi  in which the effect is used as a substitute for
the cause.[76. See for further detail on the various forms of the Majazi , Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , pp. 94-97; Badran, Usul , p. 397 ff.]When a speech consists of plain words, the intention of the person using them is to be gathered from the
words themselves, and there is no room for further enquiry as to the intention of the speaker. Thus when
a man tells his wife 'you are divorced', the divorce is pronounced in plain words and occurs regardless
of the husband's intention. But in the case of allusive words, one has to ascertain the intention behind
them and the circumstances in which they were uttered. Thus when a man tells his wife 'you are
forbidden to me', or when he asks her to 'join your relatives', no divorce will take place unless there is
evidence to show that the husband intended a divorce.[77. Badran, Usul , p. 398]Legal matters which require certainty, such as offences entailing the hadd  punishment, cannot be
established by language which is not plain. For example when a person confesses to such offences in
allusive words, he is not liable to punishment.[78. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 98.]The jurists are in agreement that a word may be used metaphorically while still retaining its literal
meaning, such as the word ' umm ' (mother) which the Arabs sometimes use metaphorically for
'grandmother' and yet still retains its literal meaning. But there is disagreement among the ulema of usul
as to whether both the literal and metaphorical meanings of a word can be applied simultaneously.
When, for example, a man orders his servant to 'kill the lion', could this also include a brave person?
The Hanafis and the Mu'tazilah have answered this question in the negative, saying that words normally
carry their literal meanings unless there is evidence to warrant a departure to another meaning. The
Shafi'is and the ulema of Hadith have held, on the other hand, that the literal and the metaphorical
meaning of a word can be simultaneously applied. They have thus validated either of the two meanings
of the Qur'anic provision 'or when you have touched women' (al-Nisa', 4:43), which could mean
touching the women with the hand, or touching in the sense of having sexual intercourse. The text in

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 116which this ayah  occurs spells out the circumstances that break the state of purity. Thus when a Muslim
'touches a woman' he must take a fresh ablution for the next salah . But according to the Hanafis, the
Qur'anic ayah  on this point only conveys the metaphorical meaning of 'touching', that is, sexual
intercourse. Hence when a person is in the state of ablution, and then touches a woman by the hand, his
ablution remains intact. For the Shafi'is, however, the key word in this ayah carries both its literal and
metaphorical meanings simultaneously. Consequently the state of purity is broken, not only by sexual
intercourse, but also by a mere touch such as a handshake with a woman who is not of one's family.[79.
Badran, Usul , p. 397. ]The Homonym ( Mushtarak )A homonym is a word which has more than one meaning. Some ulema, including al-Shafi'i, have held
the view that the homonym is a variety of 'Amm . The two are, however, different in that the homonym
inherently possesses more than one meaning, which is not necessarily the case with the 'Amm . An
example of the Mushtarak in Arabic is the word "ayn' which means several things, including eye,
water-spring, gold, and spy. Similarly the word 'qur" has two meanings, namely menstruation, and the
clean period between two menstruations. The Hanafis, the Hanbalis and the Zaydis have upheld the
first, while the Shafi'is, Malikis and Ja'faris have upheld the second meaning of qur'. [80. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.
132; EI2, IV, 101.]The plurality of meanings in a homonym may be due to the usage of different Arab tribes and
communities. Some used it for one meaning, others for the other. Otherwise a word may have acquired
a metaphorical meaning which became literal in course of time. When Mushtarak occurs in the Qur'an
or Sunnah, it denotes one meaning alone, not more than one. For the Lawgiver does not intend more
than one meaning for a word at any given time. The Shafi'is and some Mutazilah have taken exception
to this view as they maintain that in the absence of any indication in support of one of the two or more
meanings of a Mushtarak, both or all may be upheld simultaneously provided that they do not
contradict one another. According to a variant view, however, plurality of meanings on a simultaneous
basis is permissible in negation or denial ( nafy) but not in affirmation and proof ( ithbat ). If, for
example, Ahmad says 'I did not see a 'ayn (ma ra'aytu 'aynan )', 'ayn in this negative statement could
comprise all of its various meanings. But if Ahmad says 'I saw a 'ayn', than 'ayn in this statement must
be used for only one of its several meanings.[81. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 21; Isnawi, Nihayah , I, 166; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 133.] This
view, however, does not extend to commands and prohibitions which do not admit of affirmation or
denial as such. The rule in regard to commands and prohibitions of the Shari'ah is that the Lawgiver
does not intend to uphold more than one of the different meanings of a homonym at any given time. An

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 117example of a homonym which occurs in the context of a Qur'anic command is the word 'yad' (hand) in
'as for the thief, male or female, cut off their hands' (al-Ma'idah, 5:38). 'Hand' in this ayah has not been
qualified in any way, hence it can mean 'hand' from the tip of the fingers up to the wrist, or up to the
elbow, or even up to the shoulder; it also means left or right hand. But the ulema have agreed on the
first and the last of these meanings, that is, the right hand, up to the wrist.[82. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 180. ] To illustrate
the homonym in the context of a prohibitory order in the Qur'an we refer to the word 'nakaha' in sura
al-Nisa' (4:22) which reads, 'and marry not women whom your fathers had married ( ma nakaha
aba'ukum )'. 'Nakaha' is a homonym which means both marriage and sexual intercourse. The Hanafis,
the Hanbalis, al-Awza'i and others have upheld the latter, whereas the Shafi'is and the Malikis have
upheld the former meaning of nakaha. According to the first view, a woman who has had sexual
intercourse with a man is forbidden to his children and grandchildren; a mere contract of marriage,
without consummation, would thus not amount to a prohibition in this case. The Shafi'is and Malikis,
however, maintain that the text under discussion only refers to the contract of marriage. Accordingly a
woman who has entered a contract of marriage with one's father or grandfather is unlawful for one to
marry regardless as to whether the marriage had been consummated or not .[83. Badran, Bayan , pp. 103-104. ]To determine which of the two or more meanings of the Mushtarak is to be upheld in a particular
locution, reference is usually made to the context and circumstances in which it occurs. If it is a
locution that pertains to the Shari'ah, then determining the precise purport of its words must also take
into consideration the general principles and objectives of the Shari'ah. The Mushtarak is in the nature
of Mushkil (difficult) and it is for the Mujtahid to determine its correct meaning by means of research
and ijtihad ; it is his duty to do so in the event where Mushtarak constitutes the basis of a judicial order
.[84. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.133; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.179.] The mujtahid will normally look into the context. When, for example,
a homonym has two meanings, one literal and the other juridical, and it occurs in a juridical context,
than as a rule the juridical meaning will prevail. With words such as salah and talaq, for example, each
possesses a literal meaning, that is 'supplication' and 'release' respectively, but when they occur in a
juridical context, then their juridical meanings will take priority. As such, salah would be held to refer
to a particular form of worship, and talaq would mean 'dissolution of marriage'.
Finally it will be noted in passing that Mushtarak as a concept is not confined to nouns but also includes
verbs. In our discussion of commands and prohibitions in a separate chapter, we have shown how a
word in its imperative mood can impart more than one meaning. We have also discussed and illustrated
the words of the Qur'an that occur in the imperative mood, but the juridical value that they convey can
either be an obligatory command, a recommendation, or mere permissibility.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 118Chapter Five: Rules of Interpretation II: Al-Dalalat (Textual Implications)The law normally requires compliance not only with the obvious meaning of its text but also with its
implied meaning, and indirect indications and inferences that could be drawn from it. With reference to
the textual rulings of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, the ulema of usul have distinguished several shades of
meaning that a nass may be capable of imparting. The Hanafi jurists have distinguished four levels of
meaning in an order which begins with the explicit or immediate meaning of the text. Next in this order
is the 'alluded' meaning which is followed by the 'inferred' meaning, and lastly by the 'required'
meaning. There is yet a fifth variety of meaning, namely the 'divergent' meaning, which is somewhat
controversial but has, in principle, been accepted, as our discussion will show. The explicit meaning
(ibarah al-nass), which is based on the words and sentences of the text, is the dominant and most
authoritative meaning which takes priority over the other levels of implied meanings that might be
detectable in the text. In addition to its obvious meaning, a text may impart a meaning which is
indicated by the signs and allusions that it might contain. This secondary meaning is referred to as
isharah al-nass, that is the alluded meaning. A legal text may also convey a meaning which may not
have been indicated by the words or signs and yet is a complementary meaning which is warranted by
the logical and juridical purport of the text. This is known as dalalah al-nass, or the inferred meaning,
which is one degree below the alluded meaning by virtue of the fact that it is essentially extraneous to
the text. But as will later be discussed, there is a difference of opinion between the Hanafi and the
Shafi'i, jurists as to whether the inferred meaning should necessarily be regarded as inferior to the
alluded meaning. Next in this order is the iqtida' al-nass, or the required meaning, which is once again a
logical and necessary meaning without which the text would remain incomplete and would fail to
achieve its desired purpose.[1. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.143; Badran, Usul , p. 417.] When there is a conflict between the first and
the second meanings, priority is given to the first. Similarly, the second will take priority over the third
and the third over the fourth, as we shall presently explain.I. The Explicit Meaning ( Ibarah al-Nass )As already stated, this is the immediate meaning of the text which is derived from its obvious words
and sentences. The explicit meaning represents the principal theme and purpose of the text, especially
in cases where the text might impart more than one meaning and comprises in its scope a subsidiary
theme or themes in addition to the one which is obvious. In its capacity as the obvious and dominant

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 119meaning, the 'ibarah al-nass is always given priority over the secondary and subsidiary themes or
meanings of the text. To illustrate this, we refer to the Qur'anic passage on the subject of polygamy, a
text which conveys more than one meaning, as follows 'And if you fear that you may be unable to treat
the orphans fairly, then marry of the women who seem good to you, two, three or four. But if you fear
that you cannot treat [your co-wives] equitably, then marry only one. . .' (al-Nisa', 4:3). At least three or
four meanings are distinguishable in this text which are: first, the legality of marriage, a meaning which
is conveyed by the phrase fankihu ma taba lakum min al-nisa' ('marry of the women who seem good to
you'); second, limiting polygamy to the maximum of four; third, remaining monogamous if polygamy
may be feared to lead to injustice; and fourth, the requirement that orphaned girls must be accorded fair
treatment, a meaning which is indicated in the first part of the text. All of these are conveyed in the
actual words and sentences of the text. But the first and the last are subsidiary and incidental whereas
the second and the third represent the explicit themes and meanings of the text, that is, the 'ibarah al-
nass. Limiting polygamy to the maximum of four is the explicit meaning which takes absolute priority
over all the implied and incidental meanings that this text might convey.[2. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 145.]Most of the nusus of Shari'ah convey their rulings by way of 'ibarah al-nass. Thus the command to
perform the obligatory prayers, to observe the fast during Ramadan, to enforce the prescribed penalties
for certain offences, to give specified shares to the legal heirs in inheritance, etc., are all instances of
'ibarah al-nass. The effect of 'ibarah al-nass is that it conveys a definitive ruling  hukm qat'i on its own
and is in no need of corroborative evidence. But if the text is conveyed in general terms, it may be
susceptible to qualification, in which case it may not impart a definitive rule of law but a speculative
(zanni ) evidence only.[3. Badran, Usul , pp. 419-420; Khudari, Usul, p. 119.]II. The Alluded Meaning ( Isharah al-Nass )The text itself may not be obvious with regard to its alluded meaning, but it imparts, nevertheless, a
rationally concomitant meaning which is obtained through further investigation of the signs that might
be detectable therein. Since the alluded meaning does not represent the principal theme of the text and
yet embodies a necessary inference, it is called isharah al-nass . The alluded meaning may be easily
detectable in the text, or may be reached through deeper investigation and ijtihad . An example of the
isharah al-nass in the Qur'an is the text concerning the maintenance of young children which provides:
'It is his [father's] duty to provide them with maintenance and clothing according to custom' (al-
Baqarah, 2:233). The explicit meaning of this text obviously determines that it is the father's duty to
support his child. It is also understood from the wording of the text, especially from the use of the
pronoun ' lahu' (his) that only the father and no-one else bears this obligation. This much is easily

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 120detectable and constitutes the explicit meaning of this text. But to say that the child's descent is solely
attributed to the father and his identity is determined with reference to that of the father is a rational and
concomitant meaning which is derived through further investigation of the signs that are detectable in
the text.[4. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 111; Khudari, Usul , p. 120.] Similarly, the rule that the father, when in dire need, may
take what he needs of the property of his offspring without the latter's permission is yet another
meaning which is derived by way of isharah al-nass . This meaning is derived from the combination of
the text under discussion and the Hadith of the Prophet which proclaims that 'you and your property
both belong to your father'. [5. Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 1002, Hadith no.3354; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.146.]Another example of a combination of the explicit and alluded meanings occurring in the same text is
the Qur'anic ayah  on the permissibility of divorce which provides, in an address to the believers: 'There
shall be no blame on you if you divorce your wives with whom you had no sexual intercourse, nor had
you assigned for them a dower' (al-Baqarah, 2:236). The explicit meaning of this text is that divorce is
permissible prior to the consummation of marriage and the assignment of a dower. The alluded meaning
here is the legality of concluding a contract of marriage without the assignment of a dower ( mahr ). For
a divorce can only occur when there is a subsisting marriage. The text implies this to be the case' and
that a marriage can legally exist even without the assignment of a mahr .[6. Badran, Usul , p. 420.]To give yet another example of isharah al-nass we may refer to the Qur'anic text on consultation
(shura ) where we read, in an address to the Prophet, 'So pardon them [the Companions] and ask for
[God's] forgiveness for them and consult them in affairs' (Al-'Imran, 3:159). The 'ibarah al-nass in this
text requires that community affairs must be conducted through consultation. The alluded meaning of
this text requires the creation of a consultative body in the community to facilitate the consultation
which is required in the obvious text.
The effect of isharah al-nass is similar to that of 'ibarah al-nass in that both constitute the basis of
obligation, unless there is evidence to suggest otherwise. To illustrate this, we may refer once again to
the Qur'anic text (al-Baqarah, 2:233) which laid down the rule that the child follows the descent of his
father. This is a definitive ruling ( hukm qat'i ) which has, however, been set aside by ijma' in respect of
slavery to the effect that the offspring of a slave does not necessarily acquire the status of his father. In
this example, the isharah al-nass initially laid down a definitive ruling but it has been set aside in
respect of slavery by another definitive evidence, namely the ijma' .[7. Badran, Usul , p. 421.]III. The Inferred Meaning ( Dalalah al-Nass )

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 121This is a meaning which is derived from the spirit and rationale of a legal text even if it is not indicated
in its words and sentences. Unlike the explicit meaning and the alluded meaning which are both
indicated in the words and signs of the text, the inferred meaning is not so indicated. Instead, it is
derived through analogy and the identification of an effective cause ( 'illah ) which is in common
between the explicit meaning and the meaning that is derived through inference. This might explain
why some ulema have equated dalalah al-nass with analogical deduction, namely qiyas jali . To
illustrate this, we may refer to the Qur'anic text on the obligation to respect one's parents. In particular,
the text provides, 'and say not uff to them' (al-Isra' 17:23), which obviously forbids the utterance of the
slightest word of contempt to the parents. The effective cause of this prohibition is honouring the
parents and avoiding offence to them. There are, of course, other forms of offensive behaviour, besides
a mere contemptuous word such as uff, to which the effective cause of this prohibition would apply.
The inferred meaning of this text is thus held to be that all forms of abusive words and acts which
offend the parents are forbidden even if they are not specifically mentioned in the text under
consideration.[8. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 112.]To give another example, the Qur'an proclaims, concerning the property of orphans, that 'those who
unjustly devour the property of the orphans only devour fire into their bodies' (al-Nisa', 4:10). The
explicit meaning of this text forbids guardians and executors from devouring the property of their
orphaned wards for their personal gain. But by way of inference the same prohibition is extended to
other forms of destruction and waste which might have been caused, for example, through financial
mismanagement that does not involve personal gain and yet leads to the loss and destruction of the
property of the orphans. Although the text provides no indication as to the different ways in which
destruction can be caused, they are nevertheless equally forbidden. As already stated, this kind of
inference is equivalent to what is known as obvious analogy ( qiyas jali ) which consists of identifying
the effective cause of a textual ruling, and when this is identified the original ruling is analogically
extended to all similar cases. The effective cause of the ruling in the foregoing ayah is protection of the
orphans' property, and any act which causes destruction or loss of such property falls under the same
prohibition.[9. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 150.]IV. The Required Meaning ( Iqtida' al-Nass )This is a meaning on which the text itself is silent and yet which must be read into it if it is to fulfill its
proper objective. To give an example, the Qur'an proclaims concerning the prohibited degrees of
relations in marriage: 'unlawful to you are your mothers and your daughters . . .' (al-Nisa', 4:22). This

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 122text does not mention the word 'marriage', but even so it must be read into the text to complete its
meaning. Similarly we read elsewhere in the Qur'an: 'unlawful to you are the dead carcass and blood'
(al-Ma'idah, 5:3), without mentioning that these are unlawful 'for consumption'. But the text requires the
missing element to be supplied in order that it may convey a complete meaning.
To give a slightly different example of iqtida' al-nass, we may refer to the Hadith which provides:
"There is no fast ( la siyama ) for anyone who has not intended it from the night before."
The missing element could either be that the fasting is 'invalid' or that it is 'incomplete'. The Hanafis
have upheld the latter whereas the Shafi'is have read the former meaning into this Hadith. Whichever
meaning is upheld, the consequences that it may lead to will vary accordingly. [10. Ibn Majah, Sunan , I, 542, Hadith
no. 1700; Badran, Usul , p. 424. ]To summarise, a legal text may be interpreted through the application of any one or more of the four
varieties of textual implications. The meaning that is arrived at may be indicated in the words of the
text, by the signs which occur therein, by inference, or by the supplementation of a missing element.
These methods of legal construction may be applied individually or in combination with one another,
and they are all designed to carry the text to its proper and logical conclusions.
As stated above, in the event of a conflict between the 'ibarah al-nass and the isharah al-nass, the
former prevails over the latter. This may be illustrated by a reference to the two Qur'anic ayat
concerning the punishment of murder. One of these explicitly proclaims that 'retaliation is prescribed
for you in cases of murder' (al-Baqarah, 2:178). But elsewhere in the Qur'an, it is provided: 'Whoever
deliberately kills a believer, his punishment will be permanent hellfire' (al-Nisa', 4:93). The explicit
meaning of the first ayah provides that the murderer must be retaliated against; the explicit meaning of
the second ayah is that the murderer is punished with permanent hellfire. The alluded meaning of the
second ayah is that retaliation is not a required punishment for murder; instead the murderer will,
according to the explicit terms of this ayah be punished in the hereafter. There is no conflict in the
explicit meanings of the two texts, but only between the explicit meaning of the first and the alluded
meaning of the second. A conflict thus arises as to which of the two punishments are to be upheld. But
since the first ruling constitutes the explicit meaning of the text and the second is an alluded meaning,
the former prevails over the latter.[11. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.115; Khallaf,  'Ilm, p.150.]For another illustration of a conflict between the explicit and the alluded meanings, we refer to the
Qur'anic text which informs the believers of the dignified status of the martyrs, as follows: 'And think

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 123not of those who are slain in God's way as dead; they are alive, finding their sustenance in the presence
of God' (Al-'Imran, 3:169). The explicit terms of this text obviously declare the martyrs to be alive and
that anyone who thinks they are dead is mistaken. The alluded meaning of this text is held to be that no
funeral prayer is necessary for the martyr as he is deemed to be still alive. However, this conclusion
conflicts with the explicit meaning of another Qur'anic text which orders, concerning the dead in
general, to 'pray on their behalf [ salli 'alayhim ] as your prayers are a source of tranquility for them' (al-
Tawbah, 9:103). This text explicitly requires prayers for everyone, martyr or otherwise, as they are dead
literally and juridically and their property may be inherited by their legal heirs, etc. This is the explicit
meaning of this second text and it prevails over the alluded meaning of the first. [12. Badran, Usul , p. 428.]To illustrate the conflict between the alluded meaning and the inferred meaning, we refer firstly to the
Qur'anic text on the expiation of erroneous homicide which provides: 'The expiation ( kaffarah ) of
anyone who erroneously kills a believer is to set free a Muslim slave' (al-Nisa', 4:92). The explicit
meaning of this ayah is that erroneous homicide must be expiated by releasing a Muslim slave. By way
of inference, it is further understood that freeing a Muslim slave would also be required in intentional
homicide. For the purpose of kaffarah is compensation and atonement for a sin. It is argued that the
murderer is also a sinner and has committed a sin far greater then the one who kills as a result of error.
The inferred meaning derived in this way is that the murderer is liable, at least, to the same kaffarah
which is required in erroneous homicide. However, according to the next ayah in the same passage, to
which reference has already been made: 'Whoever deliberately kills a believer, his punishment is
permanent hellfire' (al-Nisa', 4:93). The alluded meaning of this text is that freeing a slave is not
required in intentional killing. This meaning is understood from the explicit terms of this ayah which
provide that the punishment of deliberate homicide is a permanent abode in hell. This would in turn
imply that murder is an unpardonable sin, and as such there is no room for kaffarah in cases of murder.
This is the alluded meaning of the second ayah; and a conflict arises between this and the inferred
meaning of the first ayah. The alluded meaning, which is that the murderer is not required to pay a
kaffarah, takes priority over the inferred meaning that renders him liable to payment.[13. Badran, Usul , p. 429;
Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 153.]The Shafi'is are in disagreement with the Hanafis on the priority of the alluded meaning over the
inferred meaning. According to the Shafi'is, the inferred meaning takes priority over the alluded
meaning. The reason given for this is that the former is founded in both the language and rationale of
the text whereas the latter is not; that the alluded meaning is only derived from a sign which is basically
weaker than the words and the rationale of the text, and that the inferred meaning is a closer meaning
and should therefore be given priority over the alluded meaning. It is on the basis of this analysis that,
in the foregoing example, the Shafi'is have given priority to the inferred meaning of the text with the
result that the murderer is also required to pay the kaffarah .[14. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.115.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 124V. Divergent Meaning (Mafhum al-Mukhalafah) and the Shafi'i Classification of al-DalalatThe basic rule to be stated at the outset here is that a legal text never implies its opposite meaning, and
that any interpretation which aims at reading a divergent meaning into a given text is unwarranted and
untenable. If a legal text is at all capable of imparting a divergent meaning, then there needs to be a
separate text to validate it. But any attempt to obtain two divergent meanings from one and the same
text is bound to defy the very essence and purpose of interpretation. This argument has been more
forcefully advanced by the Hanafis, who are basically of the view that mafhum al-mukhalafah is not a
valid method of interpretation.[15. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.153.] Having said this, however, mafhum al-mukhalafah is
upheld on a restrictive basis not only by the Shafi'is but even by the Hanafis; they have both laid down
certain conditions which must be fulfilled so as to ensure the proper use of this method.
Mafhum al-mukhalafah may be defined as a meaning which is derived from the words of the text in
such a way that it diverges from the explicit meaning thereof. [16. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 125.] To give an example, the
Qur'an proclaims the general rule of permissibility ( ibahah ) of foodstuffs for human consumption with
a few exceptions which are specified in the following text: 'Say, I find nothing in the message that is
revealed to me forbidden for anyone who wishes to eat except the dead carcass and blood shed forth'
(daman masfuhan ) (al-An'am, 6:145). With reference to the latter part of this text, would it be valid to
suggest that blood which is not shed forth ( dam ghayr masfuh ) is lawful for human consumption? The
answer to this question is in the negative. For otherwise the text would be subjected to an interpretation
which is most likely to oppose its obvious meaning. As for the permissibility of unspilt blood such as
liver and spleen, which consist of clotted blood, this is established, not by the ayah under consideration,
but by a separate text. Liver and spleen are lawful to eat by virtue of the Hadith of the Prophet which
proclaims that 'lawful to us are two types of corpses and two types of blood. These are the fish, the
locust, the liver and the spleen.[17. Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 203, Hadith no. 4132; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. I54.] 
As already indicated, the Shafi'is have adopted a different approach to mafhum al-mukhalafah. But to
put this matter in its proper perspective, we would need to elaborate on the Shafi'i approach to textual
implications ( al-dalalat' ) as a whole, and in the course of this general discussion, we shall turn to
mafhum al-mukhalafah in particular.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 125Unlike the Hanafi classification of textual implications into four types, the Shafi'is have initially divided
al-dalalat into the two main varieties of dalalah al-mantuq (pronounced meaning) and dalalah al-
mafhum (implied meaning). Both of these are derived from the words and sentences of the text. The
former form the obvious text and the latter come through logical and juridical construction thereof. An
example of dalalah al-mantuq is the Qur'anic ayah which proclaims that 'God has permitted sale and
prohibited usury' (al-Baqarah, 2:275). This text clearly speaks of the legality of sale and the prohibition
of usury. Dalalah al-mantuq has in turn been subdivided into two types, namely dalalah al-iqtida
(required meaning), and dalalah al-isharah (alluded meaning). Both of these are either indicated in the
words of the text or constitute a necessary and integral part of its meaning. As will be noted, even from
this brief description, the difference between the Shafi'i and Hanafi approaches to the classification of
al-dalalat is more formal than real.[18. Badran, Usul , p. 429; Khudari, Usul , pp. 121-122; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 120. ] Abu Zahrah has
aptly observed that essentially all of the four Hanafi varieties of al-dalalat are, in one way or another,
founded in the actual words and sentences of the text. Despite the technical differences that might exist
between the four types of implications, they are basically all founded in the text. In this way all of the
four-fold Hanafi divisions of al-dalalat can be classified under dalalah al-mantuq .[19. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 116.]Dalalah al-mafhum is an implied meaning which is not indicated in the text but is arrived at by way of
inference. This is to a large extent concurrent with what the Hanafis have termed dalalah al-nass . But
the Shafi'is have more to say on dalalah al-mafhum in that they sub-divide this into the two types of
mafhum al-muwafaqah (harmonious meaning) and mafhum al-mukhalafah (divergent meaning). The
former is an implicit meaning on which the text may be silent but is nevertheless in harmony with its
pronounced meaning. This harmonious meaning ( mafhum al-muwafaqah ) may be equivalent to the
pronounced meaning ( dalalah al-mantuq ), or may be superior to it. If it is the former, it is referred to as
lahn al-khitab (parallel meaning) and if the latter, it is known as fahwa al-khitab (superior meaning).
For example, to extend the Qur'anic ruling in sura al-Nisa' (4:10) which only forbids 'devouring the
property of orphans' to other forms of mismanagement and waste, is a 'parallel' meaning ( lahn al-
khitab ). But to extend the Qur'anic text which forbids the utterance of ' uff', that is the slightest word of
contempt, to, for instance, physical abuse of one's parents, is a meaning which is 'superior' to the
pronounced meaning of the text.[20. Hitu, Wajiz , p.124; Salih, Mabahith , p. 301.] The validity of these forms of
harmonious meanings is approved by the ulema of all schools (except the Zahiris) who are generally in
agreement with the basic concept of mafhum al-muwafaqah. But this is not the case with regard to
mafhum al-mukhalafah, on which the ulema have disagreed. [21. Badran, Usul , p. 430.]As noted above, mafhum al-mukhalafah diverges from the pronounced meaning ( dalalah al-mantuq ) of
the text, which may, however, be either in harmony or in disharmony with it. It is only when mafhum
al-mukhalafah is in harmony with the pronounced meaning of the text that it is accepted as a valid form
of interpretation, otherwise it is rejected. For an example of the divergent meaning which is in harmony

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 126with the pronounced meaning of the text, we may refer to the Hadith which provides: 'When the water
reaches the level of qullatayn (approximately two feet) it does not carry dirt.' [22. Ibn Majah, Sunan  I, 172, Hadith no.
518.] 
In this way when a polluting substance falls into water of this depth, it is still regarded as clean for
purposes of ablution. This is the pronounced, or explicit, meaning of the text. By way of mafhum al-
mukhalafah, it is understood that water below this level is capable of 'retaining' dirt. This is an
interpretation which is deemed to be in harmony with the pronounced meaning of the Hadith. [23. Zuhayr,
Usul , II, 114.]According to the Shafi'is, deduction by way of mafhum al-mukhalafah is acceptable only if it fulfills
certain conditions, which are as follows: firstly, that the divergent meaning does not exceed the scope of
the pronounced meaning. For example, the Qur'anic ayah which prohibits 'saying uff' to one's parents
may not be given a divergent meaning so as to make physical abuse of them permissible. Secondly, that
the divergent meaning has not been left out in the first place for a reason such as fear or ignorance; for
example, if a man orders his servant to 'distribute this charity among the Muslims', but by saying so he
had actually intended people in need, whether Muslims or non-Muslims, and yet omitted to mention the
latter for fear of being accused of disunity by his fellow Muslims. Should there be evidence as to the
existence of such a fear, then no divergent meaning should be deduced. A similar case would be when a
person says that 'maintenance is obligatory for ascendants and descendants', while he did not know that
collaterals are also entitled to maintenance. Should there be evidence as to his ignorance on this point,
then no divergent meaning should be attempted to the effect, for example, of saying that maintenance is
not obligatory for collaterals. Thirdly, that the divergent meaning does not go against that which is
dominant and customary in favour of something which is infrequent and rare. To give an example: the
Qur'an provides concerning the prohibited degrees of relationship in marriage: 'and forbidden to you are
[...] your step-daughters who live with you, born of your wives with whom you have consummated the
marriage; but there is no prohibition if you have not consummated the marriage' (al-Nisa', 4:23). This
text is explicit on the point that marriage to a step-daughter who is under the guardianship of her step-
father is forbidden to the latter. By way of mafhum al-mukhalafah, this ayah might be taken to mean
that a step-daughter who does not live in the house of her mother's husband may be lawfully married by
the latter. But this would be a meaning which relies on what would be a rare situation. The probable and
customary situation in this case would be that the step-daughter lives with her mother and her step-
father, which is why the Qur'an refers to this qualification, and not because it was meant to legalise
marriage with the step-daughter who did not live with him .[24. Hitu, Wajiz , p.125; Badran, Usul , p. 433.] Fourthly, that
the original text is not formulated in response to a particular question or event. For instance, the Prophet

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 127was once asked if free-grazing livestock was liable to zakah ; and he answered in the affirmative. But
this answer does not imply that the stall-fed livestock is not liable to zakah. The answer was originally
given to a question which specified the free-grazing livestock and not in order to exempt the stall-fed
variety from zakah. Fifthly, that the divergent meaning does not depart from the reality, or the particular
state of affairs, which the text is known to have envisaged. For example the Qur'an provides in a
reference to relations between Muslims and non-Muslims: 'Let not the believers befriend the
unbelievers to the exclusion of their fellow believers' (Al-'Imran, 3:28). This  ayah apparently forbids
friendship with the unbelievers, but this is not the purpose of the text. This ayah was, in fact, revealed
in reference to a particular state of affairs, namely concerning a group of believers who exclusively
befriended the unbelievers, and they were forbidden from doing this; it did not mean to impose a ban on
friendship with unbelievers. The text, in other words, contemplated a particular situation and not the
enactment of a general principle, and should therefore not be taken out of context by recourse to
mafhum al-mukhalafah .[25. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 126; Badran, Usul , p.434.] Sixthly, that the divergent meaning does not lead
to a conclusion that would oppose another textual ruling. To give an example, we refer to the Qur'anic
text on the requirement of retaliation which provides: 'Retaliation is prescribed for you in cases of
murder: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, the woman for the woman [ ... ]' (alBaqarah, 2:178).
This text may not be taken by way of mafhum al mukhalafah to mean that a man is not retaliated against
for murdering a woman. For such a conclusion would violate the explicit ruling of another Qur'anic text
which requires retaliation for all intentional homicides on the broadest possible basis of 'life for life' (al-
Ma'idah, 5:45).
The main restriction that the Hanafis have imposed on mafhum al mukhalafah is that it must not be
applied to a revealed text, namely the Qur'an and the Sunnah. As a method of interpretation, mafhum al
mukhalafah is thus validated only with regard to a non-revealed text. Only in this context, that is, in
regard to rational proofs and man-made law, can it provide a valid basis of hukm and ijtihad. The main
reason that the Hanafis have given in support of this view is that the Qur'an itself discourages reliance
on mafhum al-mukhalafah, for there are many injunctions in the Qur'an and Sunnah whose meaning
will be distorted if they were to be given divergent interpretation. To give an example, we read in the
Qur'an, in a reference to the number of months that God enacted on the day He created the universe,
that there shall be twelve months in a year. The text then continues to provide that 'four of them are
sacred, so avoid committing acts of oppression [ zulm ] therein' (al Tawbah, 9:36).[26. These are the months of
Muharram, Dhu al-Hijjah, Dhu al-Qi'dah and Rajab] By way of mafhum al-mukhalafah , this text could be taken to mean
that acts of oppression are permissible during the rest of the year. This would obviously corrupt the
purpose of this text, as oppression is always forbidden regardless of the time in which it is
committed.[27. Badran, Usul , p. 43 5.] Similarly, there is a Hadith which instructs the believers that 'none of you
may urinate in permanently standing water nor may you take a bath therein to cleanse yourselves of
major pollution ( janabah )'. [28. Tabrizi, Mishkat, I, 148; Hadith no. 474.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 128 
By way of mafhum al mukhalafah, this text could be taken to mean that taking a bath other than the one
specifically for janabah is permissible in such water, or that urinating is permissible in flowing water,
neither of which would be correct. Bathing in small ponds below a certain depth is not permitted
whether it be for janabah or otherwise.
The Hanafis have further concluded that whenever necessary the Qur'an itself has stated the divergent
implications of its own rulings, and when this is the case, the divergent meaning becomes an integral
part of the text and must be implemented accordingly. This style of the Qur'anic legislation suggests
that if recourse to mafhum al-mukhalafah were generally valid, there would be no need for it to be
explicitly spelled out in the Qur'anic text. The Qur'an, in other words, is self-contained and does not
leave it to us to deduce the law from it by recourse to divergent interpretation. Note, for example, the
text which instructs the husband to avoid sexual intercourse with his wife during her menstruation. The
text then immediately follows on to specify its own divergent implication: 'And approach them not until
they are clean. But when they have purified themselves, you may approach them' (al-Baqarah, 2:223).
In the same sura, there is another text, to which reference has already been made, concerning the
prohibition of marriage between the step-daughter and her step-father who has consummated the
marriage with her mother. The text then continues to specify its divergent meaning by providing that
'there is no prohibition if you have not consummated the marriage' (al-Baqarah, 2:23). The Hanafis have
thus concluded that mafhum al-mukhalafah is not applicable to the  nusus of the Qur'an and Sunnah. We
only deduce from the nusus such rules as are in harmony with their explicit terms.[29. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 117-
118.]The Shafi'is and the Malikis who validate the application of mafhum al-mukhalafah to the nusus have,
in addition to the conditions that were earlier stated, imposed further restrictions which consist of
specifying exactly what forms of linguistic expressions are amenable to this method of interpretation.
For this purpose the Shafi'is have sub-divided mafhum al-mukhalafah into four types. The main purpose
of this classification is to introduce greater accuracy into the use of mafhum al-mukhalafah , specifying
that it is an acceptable method of deduction only when it occurs in any of the following forms but not
otherwise:
1. Mafhum al-Sifah  (Implication of the Attribute). When the ruling of a text is dependent on the
fulfillment of a quality or an attribute then the ruling in question obtains only when that quality is
present; otherwise it lapses. This can be shown in the Qur'anic text on the prohibited degrees of

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 129relations in marriage which includes 'the wives of your sons proceeding from your loins' (al-Nisa' 4:23).
The pronounced meaning of this text is the prohibition of the wife of one's own son in marriage. The
son has thus been qualified in the text by the phrase 'proceeding from your loins'. By way of mafhum al-
mukhalafah , it is concluded from this qualification that the wife of an adopted son, or of a son by
fosterage ( rada'a ), that is a child who has suckled the breast of one's wife, is not prohibited.[30. Badran, Usul ,
p. 432; Salih, Mabahith, p. 302 ; Khudari, Usul , p. 123.]2. Mafhum al-Shart  (Implication of the Condition). When the ruling of a text is contingent on a
condition, then the ruling obtains only in the presence of that condition, and lapses otherwise. An
example of this is the Qur'anic text on the entitlement to maintenance of divorced women who are
observing their waiting period ( 'iddah ). The text proclaims: 'If they are pregnant, then provide them
with maintenance until they deliver the child' (al-Talaq, 65:6). The condition here is pregnancy and the
hukm applies only when this condition is present. By way of mafhum al-mukhalafah , it is concluded, by
those who validate this method at least, that maintenance is not required if the divorced woman, who is
finally divorced, is not pregnant. Similarly, the Qur'anic text which provides for a concession in regard
to fasting is conveyed in conditional terms. Having laid down the duty of fasting, the text then
continues: 'but if any one is ill or traveling, the prescribed fasting should be observed later' (al-Baqarah,
2:185). By way of mafhum al-mukhalafah , it is concluded that the concession to break the fast does not
apply if one is neither ill nor traveling, which is a valid interpretation. [31. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 127; ]3. Mafhum al-Ghayah  (Implication of the Extent). When the text itself demarcates the extent or scope
of the operation of its ruling, the latter will obtain only within the scope of the stated limits and will
lapse when the limit is surpassed. To illustrate this, the Qur'anic text on the time of fasting provides the
farthest limit beyond which one must stop eating and drinking during Ramadan: 'Eat and drink until you
see the white streak [of dawn in the horizon] distinctly from the black' (al-Baqarah, 2:187). By way of
mafhum al-mukhalafah, it is concluded that when whiteness appears in the horizon, one may neither eat
nor drink. [32. Khudari, Usul , p. 123]4. Mafhum al-Adad (Implication of the Stated Number). When the ruling of a text is conveyed in terms
of a specified number, the number so stated must be carefully observed. Thus the Qur'anic text on the
punishment of adultery is clearly stated to be one hundred lashes (al-Nur, 24:2) By way of mafhum al-
mukhalafah this text is taken to mean that it is not permissible either to increase or decrease the stated
number of lashes.[33. Khudari, Usul , p. 123.]In conclusion, it may be said that the foregoing methods are generally designed to encourage rational
enquiry in the deduction of the ahkam from the divinely revealed sources. They provide the jurist and
the mujtahid with guidelines so as to ensure the propriety of interpretation and ijtihad. The restrictions

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 130that are imposed on the liberty of the mujtahid are obvious enough in that the textual rulings of the
Qur'an and Sunnah must be treated carefully so that they are not stretched beyond the limits of their
correct implications. Yet the main thrust of the guidelines that are provided is one of encouragement to
the exercise of rational enquiry in the understanding and implementation of the nusus. The rules of
interpretation that are discussed under this and the preceding chapter are once again indicative of the
primacy of revelation over reason, and yet they are, at the same time, an embodiment of the significant
role that reason must play side by side with the revelation. The two are substantially concurrent and
complementary to one another.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 131Chapter Six: Commands and ProhibitionsThe language of the Qur'an (and the Sunnah ) differs from that of modern statutes in that Qur'anic
legislation is not confined to commands and prohibitions and their consequences, but is often coupled
with an appeal to the conscience of the individual. This moral appeal may consist of a persuasion or a
warning, an allusion to the possible benefit or harm that may accrue from observing or violating an
injunction, or a promise of reward/punishment in the hereafter. Modern laws are often devoid of such
appeals, as they are usually confined to an exposition of imperative rules anti their tangible results. [1. Cf
Shaltut, Islam , p 499.]Commands and prohibitions in the Qur'an occur in a variety of forms. While an injunction is normally
expected to be in the imperative mood, there are occasions where a simple past is used as a substitute.
For example, the injunctions that `retaliation is prescribed for you in cases of murder' and that `fasting
is prescribed for you' (al-Baqarah, 2:178 and 183) are both expressed in the past tense. Similarly, a
Qur'anic injunction may occur in the form of a moral condemnation of a certain form of conduct, such
as the rule on the sanctity of private dwellings which provides: 'It is no virtue to enter houses from the
back' (al-Baqarah, 2: 189) [2. This is one of the several ayat which occur in the Qur’an concerning the privacy of one's home.]. Also, a
Qur'anic command/prohibition may be conveyed in the form of an allusion to the consequences of a
form of conduct, such as a promise of reward or punishment in the hereafter. For example, after
expounding the rules of inheritance in sura al-Nisa' (4:13-14) the text goes on to promise to those who
observe them a reward, and warns violators of a punishment, in the hereafter.I. CommandsA command proper ( amr) is defined as a verbal demand to do something issued from a position of
superiority over who is inferior.[3. Badran, Usul , p. 360.] Command in this sense differs from both supplication
(du`a' ) and request ( iltimas ) in that the former is a demand from an inferior to one who is superior,
whereas a request is a demand among people of equal or near-equal status. Since a verbal command can
mean different things, namely an obligatory order, a mere recommendation, or even permissibility, the
ulema have differed as to which of these is the primary and which the secondary meaning of a
command. Some have held the view that amr is in the nature of a homonym ( mushtarak ) which imparts
all of these meanings. Others have held that amr partakes in only two of these concepts, namely
obligation and recommendation, butt not permissibility. Still others have held that amr implies a

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 132permission to do something and that this is the widest meaning of amr, which is common to all three of
the foregoing concepts. [4. Badran, Usul , p. 361; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 91.]According to the majority opinion, however, a command by itself, that is, when it is not attended by
clues or circumstances that might give it a particular meaning, implies obligation or an emphatic
demand only. But this may change in the event of other indications being present, which might reduce a
command to permissibility, recommendation, or indeed to a variety of other meanings. Thus when we
read in the Qur'an commands such as kulu wa'shrabu (`eat and drink') (al-A'raf, 7:31), the indications
are that they amount to no more than permissibility ( Ibahah ). For eating and drinking are the necessities
of human life, and a command in respect of them must logically amount to a permissibility only.
Similarly the Qur'anic permission in respect of hunting after the completion of the hajj ceremonies
given in sura al-Ma'idah (5:2 - wa idha halaltum fastadu ) and its address to the believers to 'scatter in
the land' ( fa'ntashiru fi'l-ard ) after performing the Friday prayers (al-Jumu`ah, 62:10) are both in the
imperative form. But in both cases the purpose is to render these activities permissible only. [5. Cf. Shatibi,
Muwafaqat , III, 88.]A command may likewise convey a recommendation should there be indications to warrant this
conclusion. This is, for example, the case with regard to the Qur'anic command which requires the
documentation of loans: `When you give or take a loan for a fixed period, reduce it into writing' (al-
Baqarah, 2:282). However, from an indication which occurs in the next ayah in the same sura, it is
concluded that the command here implies a recommendation ( nadb ) only. This ayah reads: `and if one
of you deposit a thing on trust, let the trustee [faithfully] discharge his trust'. Here the use of the word
'trust' ( amanah ) signifies that the creditor may trust the debtor even without any writing.[6. Khallaf, Ilm, p.111.]The majority of ulema have held the same view regarding the requirement of witnesses in commercial
contracts, which is the subject of another Qur'anic command occurring in the same passage, known as
the ayah al-mudayanah (2: 282): 'Whenever you enter a contract of sale, let it be witnessed and let
neither the scribe nor the witness suffer harm.' The Zahiri ulema have upheld the obvious meaning of
these provisions and have made documentation a requirement of every loan, or any form of deferred
payment, and have made witnesses a requirement of every contract of sale. This, in their view, is more
conducive to the fulfillment of contracts and the prevention of disputes among people. [7. Abu Zahrah, Usul ,
p.75; Badran, Usul , p.362.]A command may, according to the indications provided by the context and circumstances, imply a
threat, such as the Qur'anic address to the unbelievers: 'Do what you wish' ( i`malu ma shi'tum-al-Nur ,
24: 33) and to the devil: 'Lead to destruction those that you can' ( wastafziz man intata'ta ) (Bani Isra'il,
17:64). A command may similarly imply contempt ( ihanah ) such as the Qur'anic address to the
unbelievers on the Day of Judgment: 'Taste [the torture], you mighty and honourable!' A command may
sometimes imply supplication when someone says, for example, `O Lord grant me forgiveness', and
indeed a host of other meanings which may be understood in the light of the context and surrounding

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 133circumstances.[8. Badran, Usul , p.363; Hitu, Wajiz , pp.134-138] As already noted, the majority of ulema have held that a
command normally conveys an obligation unless there are indications to suggest otherwise.
The Lawgiver may at times order something which has hitherto been prohibited. The question then
arises as to the nature of a command which follows a prohibition ( al-amr ba'd al-hazar ); does it convey
an obligation or a mere permissibility? The majority of ulema have held the view that a command
following a prohibition means permissibility, not obligation. Two examples of such a command in the
Qur'an have already been given above in the context of the permission to hunt following its prohibition
during the hajj ceremonies and the permission to conduct trade following its prohibition at the time of
the Friday prayers (al-Ma'idah, 5:2; and al-Jumu'ah, 62:10 respectively)[9. Badran, Usul , p.363; Hitu, Wajiz , p.141.] An
example of such a command in the Sunnah  is the Hadith in which the Prophet is reported to have said: 'I
had forbidden you from ,visiting the graves. Nay, visit them, for it reminds you of the hereafter'. [10.
Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 83; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 211; Tabrizi, Mishkat , I, 554, Hadith no.1769.]
The next question which arises in this connection is whether a command requires a single compliance
or repetition. According to the majority view, this question can only be determined in the light of
indication, which might specify that repeated performance is required. However in the absence of such
indications, a single instance of performance is the minimum requirement of a command. Among the
indications which determine repetition is when a command is issued in conditional terms. For example,
the Qur'anic provision `if you are impure then clean yourselves' (al-Ma'idah, 5:7), or the text which
provides: 'The adulterer and adulteress, flog them each one hundred lashes', that is, if they commit
adultery (al-Nur, 24:2). Since the command to take a bath in the first ayah  is conditional on janabah ,
that is, on sexual intercourse, then a bath must be taken following every instance of sexual intercourse.
Similarly when a command is dependent on a cause or an attribute, then it must be fulfilled whenever
the cause or the attribute is present. The Qur'anic command, for example, which reads: `Perform the
salah at the decline of the sun' (Bani Isra'il, 17:18), requires repeated performance at every instance
when the cause for it is present, that is, when the specified time of salah  arrives.[11. Shawkani, Irshad , pp 98-99;
Badran, Usul , p.364.]As for the question whether a command requires immediate or delayed performance, it is once again
observed that the command itself merely consists of a demand, and the manner of its performance must
be determined in the light of indications and surrounding circumstances. When, for example, A tells B
to 'do such and such now', or alternatively orders him to `do such and such tomorrow', both orders are
valid and there is no contradiction. However, if a command were to require immediate execution then

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 134the word `now' In the first order would be superfluous just as the word `tomorrow' in the second order
would be contradictory. When a person commands another to `bring me some water' while he is thirsty,
then by virtue of this indication, the command requires immediate performance just as the order to
'collect the rent' when it is given, say, in the middle of the month while the rent is collected at the end of
each month, must mean delayed performance.
It is thus obvious that the commandant may specify a particular time in which the command must be
executed. The time limit may be strict or it may be flexible. If it is flexible, like the command to
perform the obligatory salah , then performance may be delayed until the last segment of the prescribed
time. But if the command itself specifies no time limit, such as the order to perform an expiation
(kaffarah ), then execution may be delayed indefinitely within the expected limits of one's lifetime.
However, given the uncertainty of the time of one's death, an early performance is recommended,,
regard to kaffarat.[12. Shawkani, Irshad , pp.99-100; Badran, Usul , pp.365-366.]And lastly the question arises as to whether a command to do something implies the prohibition of its
opposite. According to the majority view, a command to do something does imply the prohibition of its
opposite regardless as to whether the opposite in question consists of a single act or of a plurality of
acts. Thus when a person is ordered to move, he is in the meantime forbidden to remain still; or when a
person is ordered to stand, he is forbidden from doing any of a number of opposing acts such as sitting,
crouching, lying down, etc. However, some ulema, including al-Juwayni, al-Ghazali, Ibn al-Hajib and
the Mu'tazilah, have held that a command does not imply the prohibition of its opposite. A group of the
Hanafi and Shafi'i ulema have held that only one of the several opposing acts, whether known or
unknown, is prohibited, but not all. [13. Shawkani, Irshad , pp.101-102.] The result of such differences would
obviously have a bearing on whether the person who commits the opposite of a command must be
penalized, and if so, to what extent. Specific answers to such questions can obviously only be
determined in the light of the surrounding circumstances and the state of mind of the individual
concerned, as well as the general objectives of the Lawgiver/commander that can be ascertained in a
given command.II. ProhibitionsProhibition ( nahy ), being the opposite of a command, is defined as a word or words which demand the
avoidance of doing something addressed from a position of superiority to one who is inferior.[14. Badran,
Usul , p.366.] The typical form of a prohibitory order in Arabic is that of a negative command beginning
with la such as la taf'al (do not), or the Qur'anic prohibition which reads 'slay not [ la taqtulu ] the life
which God has made sacred' (al-An'am, 6:151). A prohibition may be expounded in a statement ( jumlah

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 135khabariyyah ) such as occurs, for example, in the Qur'an (al-Baqarah, 2:221): `prohibited to you are the
flesh of dead corpses and blood'. It may sometimes occur in the form of a command which requires the
avoidance of something, such as the Qur'anic phrase wa dharu al-bay' (`abandon sale', that is during the
time of Friday salah -al-Jumu`ah, 62:100), or wa'jtanibu qawl al-zur (`avoid lying') in sura al-Hajj
(22:30), or may occur in a variety of other forms that are found in the Qur'an.
A prohibition, like a command, may convey a variety of meanings. Although the primary meaning of
nahy  is illegality, or tahrim, nahy is also used to imply a mere reprehension ( karahiyyah ), or guidance
(irshad ), or reprimand ( ta'dib ), or supplication ( du'a'). An example of nahy  which implies reprehension
is the Qur'anic ayah  addressing the believers to `prohibit not [ la tuharrimu ] the clean foods that God
has made lawful to you' (al-Ma'idah, 5:87). Nahy which conveys moral guidance may be illustrated by
the Qur'anic ayah  addressing the believers to 'ask not questions about things which, if made plain to
you, may cause you trouble' (al-Ma'idah, 5:104). An example of nahy  which implies a threat is when a
master tells his recalcitrant servant: `Don't follow what 1 say and you will see.' An example of nahy
which conveys supplication in the Qur'an occurs in sura al-Baqarah (2:286) which reads: 'Our Lord,
condemn us not if we forget.' Since nahy  can convey several meanings, the ulema have differed as to
which of these is the primary ( haqiqi ) as opposed to the secondary or metaphorical meanings of nahy .
Some have held that illegality ( tahrim ) is the primary meaning of nahy  while others consider
reprehension ( karahiyyah ) to be the original meaning of nahy . According to yet another view, nahy  is a
homonym in respect of both. The maturity ( jumhur ) of ulema have held the view that nahy  primarily
implies tahrim,  a meaning which will be presumed to prevail unless there are indications to suggest
otherwise. An example of nahy  in the Qur'an which has retained its primary meaning is the phrase ' la
taqtulu ' in the ayah  which provide, `slay not life which God has made sacred'. There is no indication in
this text to warrant a departure from the primary meaning of  la taqtulu , which must therefore prevail.
The primary meaning of nahy  may be abandoned for a figurative meaning if there is an indication to
justify this. Hence the phrase la tu'akhidhna (`condemn us not') implies supplication, as the demand
here is addressed to Almighty God, and is hence a demand from a position of inferiority, which
indicates that the correct meaning of nahy  in this context is supplication, or du'a.[15. Shawkani, Irshad , pp.109-
110;Badran, Usul , pp. 366-368; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 150.]III. Value of Legal InjunctionsThe object of a prohibition may be to prevent an act such as adultery ( zina), or it may be to prevent the
utterance of words such as those purporting to effect the sale of dead corpses, or of a freeman, by means
of offer and acceptance. In either case, the prohibition does not produce any rights or legal effects
whatsoever. Hence no right of paternity is established through zina; on the contrary, the perpetrator is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 136liable to punishment. Similarly, no contract is concluded and no right of ownership is proven as a result
of the sale of a corpse.
If the object of prohibition is an act, and it is prohibited owing to an extraneous attribute rather than the
essence of the act itself, such as fasting on the day of ` id, then the act is null and void ( batil) according
to the Shafi`is but is irregular ( fasid ) according to the Hanafis, The act, in other words, can produce no
legal result according to the Shafi`is, but does create legal consequences according to the Hanafis,
although it is basically sinful. The Hanafis consider such acts to be defective and must be dissolved by
means of annulment ( faskh ), or must be rectified if possible. If the prohibition consists of words such as
concluding a contract of sale which partakes in usury, it is still batil according to the Shafi'is but  fasid
according to the Hanafis, which means that it should be either revoked or amended to the extent that it
is purified of its usurious content.
The position is, however, different with regard to devotional matters (` ibadat ) whose purpose is seeking
the pleasure of God. The fasid  in this area is equivalent to batil. Hence there is no merit to be gained by
fasting on the day of id, nor will it be taken into account in compensation to the fasting owed by the
mukallaf.
But if the prohibition is due to an external factor such as a sale concluded at the time of the Friday
prayer, or when salah  is performed in usurped land ( al-ard al-maghsubah ), the ulema are generally in
agreement that all the legal consequences will follow from the prohibited act, although the perpetrator
would have incurred a sin. Thus the sale so concluded will prove the right of ownership and the salah  is
valid and no compensatory performance of the same salah will be required.[16. Shawkani, Irshad , p.110; Badran, Usul,
p. 369.] Further detail on the fasid  and batil can be found in our discussion of the ahkam , which is the
subject of a separate chapter.
As for the question of whether a prohibition requires both immediate as well as repeated compliance,
the ulema are generally in agreement that it does and that this is the only way a prohibition can be
observed. Unless the object of a prohibition is avoided at all times, the prohibition is basically not
observed. It is therefore necessary to avoid the prohibited act as from the moment it is issued and
whenever it is applicable. This is the case with regard to prohibitions that are not qualified in any way,
such as the Qur'anic text concerning the property of the orphans which provides: 'Do not approach [ la
taqrabu ] the property of the orphan except in the way that is best' (al-An'am, 6:152). However if a
prohibition is qualified by a condition that overrules immediate compliance, then it has to be observed
within the meaning of that condition. An example of this occurs in the Qur'an (al-Mumtahinah, 60:10)
which reads, in an address to the believers: 'When there come to you believing women refugees,
examine [and test] them. God knows best as to their faith. If you find that they are believers, then send
them not back to the unbelievers.' In this ayah , the prohibition (not to send them back) is conditional
upon finding that they are believers, and until then the prohibition must remain in abeyance.[17. Badran, Usul ,

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 137p.370.] There is a difference between a command and a prohibition in that the purpose of the former is to
create something or to establish the existence of something, and this is realized by a single instance of
execution, and there is basically no need for repetition. A prohibition on the other hand aims at the
absence of something, and this cannot be realized unless it is absent all the time. A single instance of
absence is thus not enough to fulfill the purpose of a prohibition.[18. Hitu, Wajiz , p.151.]As already stated, a command which succeeds a prohibition conveys permissibility only. The position is
once again different with regard to a prohibition: whenever a prohibition succeeds a command, it
conveys illegality or tahrim , not a mere permissibility.[19. Hitu, Wajiz , p.151.]Injunctions, whether occurring in the Qur'an or the Sunnah , are of two types: explicit ( sarih ) and
implicit ( ghayr sarih ). Explicit commands and prohibitions require total obedience without any
allowance for individual circumstances and regardless as to whether they are found to be rational or not.
For it is in the essence of devotion ( ibadah ) that obedience does not depend on the rationality or
otherwise of an injunction. The question arises as to whether one should adopt a literal approach to the
enforcement of commands and prohibitions, or should allow considerations of rationality and maslahah
to play a part in the manner of their implementation. For example, the Hadith which provides that the
owners of livestock must give `one in forty sheep' in zakah [20. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 410, Hadith no.1567;Ghazali, Mustasfa ,
159.]: should this provision be followed literally, or could we say that the equivalent price of one or many
sheep could also be given in zakah ? Similarly, when the Qur'an enjoins the Muslims concerning
attendance at the Friday congregational prayers to `rush to the remembrance of God and abandon sale'
(al-Jumu'ah, 62:9), should the word rush ( fa's aw ) be taken literally or in the sense of an emphasis on
diligence at attending the Friday prayers? A similar question can be raised with regard to the second
part of the same ayah  which commands the Muslims to 'abandon sale' ( wa dharu'l-bay' ). Should this be
taken to imply that a sale which has occurred at the specified time is actually unlawful and void, or
should it once again be taken as an order that requires perseverance and consistent observance? Should
one follow the main objective of the Lawgiver or the literal requirements of the text which convey a
command or a prohibition? These are but some of the questions which are asked concerning the correct
understanding of Qur'anic injunctions. [21. For a detailed treatment of commands and prohibitions see Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 90-140]The implicit injunctions are also divided into two types. The first of these is when a ruling of the Qur'an
is conveyed in implicit terms but has been substantiated by the explicit terms of the Hadith, in which
case it becomes equivalent to an explicit ruling. [22. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 92.] The second type of implicit
injunction is when a ruling of the Qur'an occurs, not in the form of a command or a prohibition, but as
praise or condemnation of a certain conduct. The precise import of such provisions cannot always be
ascertained as to whether they convey an injunction or a mere warning or recommendation as the case
may be. Note for example the text which reads that `God does not love the prodigals ( al-musrifin )' (al-
A'raf, 7:31). The text of this ayah  does not indicate the precise legal or religious enormity of
extravagance, and it cannot be ascertained whether extravagance is prohibited or merely disapproved.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 138Another question which merits attention in the study of commands and prohibitions is related to the
means that lead to the performance of a command, or the avoidance of a prohibition. The question is
whether the means should also be covered by the rules which regulate their ends. Briefly, the answer to
this question is in the affirmative. The means which lead to the observance of commands and
prohibitions are covered by the same ruling which applies to the command/prohibition in the first place.[23. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , 93.]A mujtahid  who deduces the law from a given text must be adequately familiar with the language of the
Qur'an and must know that the ahkam are not only expressed in the imperative but that a praise or a
promise of reward may in effect be equivalent to a command. Similarly, a mere denunciation, a threat
of punishment in the hereafter, or a reference to the adverse consequences of a form of conduct, may be
equivalent to a prohibition.[24. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.72.] The distinction as to whether a command in the Qur'an
conveys an obligation ( wujub ), a recommendation ( nadb ) or mere permissibility ( ibahah ) must be
determined in the light of the objectives of the Shari'ah  as well as by looking at the meaning of the
words of the Qur'an. To determine the value ( hukm ) of a command, attention is paid not only to the
grammatical form of the words in which it is conveyed, but also to the general objectives of the law.
This is equally true of a prohibitory text. To determine whether a prohibition conveys actual tahrim , or
mere reprehension ( karahah ) is not always easily understood from the words of the nusus . Only a
portion of the nusus  convey a precise meaning by virtue of clarity of their language. In Shatibi's
estimation, a much larger portion of the nusus  of the Qur'an cannot be determined by reference only to
the linguistic forms in which they are expressed. The mujtahid  must therefore be fully informed of the
general principles and objectives of the Shari'ah  so as to be able to determine the precise values of the
nusus  and the commands or prohibitions that they contain.[25. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 90.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 139Chapter Seven: Naskh  (Abrogation)Literally, naskh  means 'obliteration', such as in nasakhat al-rih athar al-mashy , meaning 'the wind
obliterated the footprint'. Naskh  also means transcription or transfer ( al-naql wa al-tahwil ) of something
from one state to another while its essence remains unchanged. In this sense, ' naskh ' has been used in
the Qur'anic ayah  which reads: inna kunna nastansikhu ma kuntum ta'malun , that is, 'verily We write all
that you do' (al-Jathiyah, 45:29). This usage of naskh can also be seen in the familiar Arabic
expressions, tanasukh al-arwah (reincarnation), and tanasukh al-mawarith , the transfer of inheritance
from persons to persons. The ulema have differed as to which of these two meanings of naskh  is the
literal ( haqiqi ) as opposed to that which might be metaphorical ( majazi ). Some ulema, including Abu
Bakr al-Baqillani and al-Ghazali, have held that ' naskh ' is a homonym and applies equally to either of
its two meanings. According to the majority view, however, obliteration ( al-raf wa al-izalah ) is the
primary, and transcription/transfer is the secondary, meaning of naskh . [1. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 69; Amidi, ahkam , III,
102ff; Hitu, Wajiz , p.241.]Naskh may be defined as the suspension or replacement of one Shari'ah  ruling by another, provided that
the latter is of a subsequent origin, and that the two rulings are enacted separately from one another.
According to this definition, naskh  operates with regard to the rules of Shari'ah  only, a proviso which
precludes the application of naskh  to rules that are founded in rationality ( aql) alone. The hukm , or
ruling, in this definition not only includes commands and prohibitions but also the three intermediate
categories of recommended, reprehensible and mubah . The requirement that the two rulings must be
separate means that each must be enacted in a separate text. For when they both occur in one and the
same passage, it is likely that one complements or qualifies the other, or that one may embody a
condition or an exception to the other. [2. Badran, Usul , p. 442.]Abrogation applies almost exclusively to the Qur'an and the Sunnah ; its application to ijma` and qiyas ,
as will later be explained, has been generally overruled. And even then, the application of naskh  to the
Qur'an and Sunnah  is confined, in terms of time, to one period only, which is the lifetime of the
Prophet. There is, in other words, no naskh  after the demise of the Prophet. But during his lifetime,
there were instances when some of the rulings of the Qur'an and Sunnah were either totally or partially
repealed by subsequent rulings. This was due mainly to the change of circumstances in the life of the
community and the fact that the revelation of the Qur'an spanned a period of twenty-three years. The
ulema are unanimous on the occurrence of naskh  in the Sunnah . It is, however, with regard to the
occurrence of naskh  in the Qur'an on which there is some disagreement both in principle as well as on
the number of instances in which naskh  is said to have occurred.[3. Khallaf, Ilm, p. 222; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.148.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 140Abrogation is by and large a Madinese phenomenon which occurred as a result of the changes that the
Muslim community encountered following the Prophet's migration to Madinah. Certain rules were
introduced, at the early stage of the advent of Islam, which were designed to win over the hearts of the
people. An example of this is the number of daily prayers which was initially fixed at two but was later
increased to five. Similarly, mut`ah , or temporary marriage, was initially permitted but was
subsequently prohibited when the Prophet migrated to Madinah.[4. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 63; Badran, Usul, p. 447.]These and similar changes were effected in the nusus  at a time when the Muslim community acquired
sovereign authority and fresh legislation was deemed necessary to regulate its life in the new
environment of Madinah.
Some Hanafi and Mu'tazili scholars have held the view that ijma can abrogate a ruling of the Qur'an or
the Sunnah . The proponents of this view have claimed that it was due to ijma` that `Umar b. al-Khattab
discontinued the share of the mu'allafah al-qulub in the zakah . These were persons of influence whose
friendship and co-operation was deemed to be beneficial to Islam.[5. Taj, Siyasah , p.14. ] The Qur'an assigned
them a share in zakah  (al-Tawbah, 9:60), but this was discontinued apparently because the  mujtahidun
of the time reached a unanimous agreement to that effect. The correct view, however, is that owing to
differences of opinion that are recorded on this matter, no  ijma ` could be claimed to have
materialized.[6. Badran, Usul , p.458.] Besides, the majority of ulema have held that ijma` neither abrogates nor
can be abrogated itself; and at any rate ijma cannot abrogate a nass of the Qur'an or the Sunnah . For a
valid ijma' may never be concluded in contradiction to the Qur'an or the Sunnah  in the first place. Al-
Amidi elaborates this as follows: the hukm which the ijma` seeks to repeal might be founded in a nass,
another ijma,  or qiyas . The first is not possible, for the ijma` which seeks to abrogate the nass of Qur'an
or Sunnah  is either based on an indication ( dalil) or not. If it is not based on any dalil, then it is likely to
be erroneous, and if it is based on a dalil this could either be a nass or qiyas . If the basis ( sanad ) of
ijma` is a qiyas , then abrogation is not permissible (as we shall explain later); and if the sanad  of ijma`
is a nass, then abrogation is by that nass, not by ijma`. The share of the mu'allafah al-qulub was
discontinued by Umar b. al-Khattab on the grounds of the Shari'ah -oriented policy ( al-siyasah al-
shar`iyyah ), which is explained in the caliph's widely-quoted phrase that `God has exalted Islam, which
is no longer in need of their favor.' [7. Amidi, Ihkam, III , 161; Taj, Siyasah , p. 28.]According to the general rule a Qur'anic nass or a Mutawatir  Hadith cannot be abrogated by a weaker
Hadith, by ijma' or by qiyas . For they are not of equal authority to the nass. This is, in fact, the main
argument in support of the rule, already referred to, that no abrogation of the nusus  is possible after the
demise of the Prophet, for the Qur'an and the Sunnah  ceased to be revealed with his demise. Since
nothing weaker than the Qur'an and Sunnah  can abrogate anything in either of these sources,
abrogation, to all intents and purposes, came to an end with the death of the Prophet. Ijma`, qiyas  and
ijtihad, being weaker in comparison to the nusus , cannot abrogate the rules of divine revelations.[8. Khallaf,
Ilm, p. 228. ]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 141It is in view of these and similar considerations that the ulema have arrived at the general rule that ijma'
can neither abrogate anything nor be abrogated itself. Abrogation in other words is generally not
relevant to ijma`. The preferable view, however, is that ijma' cannot abrogate the rulings of the Qur'an,
the Sunnah , or of another ijma' which is founded in the Qur'an, Sunnah , or qiyas . However, a
subsequent  ijma' may abrogate an existing ijma` which might be founded in considerations of public
interest, or maslahah mursalah . This would in theory appear to be the only situation a which  ijma`
could  operate as an abrogator.[9. Badran, Usul , p. 459.]And finally, since the principal function of qiyas  is to extend the rulings of the Qur'an and Sunnah  to
similar cases, it may never operate in the opposite direction, namely, to repeal a text of the Qur'an or
Sunnah . Broadly speaking, qiyas  has no place in the theory of naskh : qiyas  cannot be an abrogator,
basically because it is weaker than the nass and ijma and thus cannot abrogate either. Nor can qiyas
itself be abrogated, for qiyas  is normally based on a textual ruling and is bound to remain valid for as
long as the original text remains valid. It is thus inconceivable that a qiyas  be abrogated while the text
to which it is founded remains in force. Furthermore, an established analogy is not exactly abrogated by
a subsequent analogy. If the first analogy is based on the Qur'an, or Sunnah , then a conflicting analogy
would presumably be erroneous. Besides, the two analogies can coexist and be counted as two ijtihadi
opinions without the one necessarily abrogating the other. For the rule concerning ijtihad  is that the
mujtahid  deserves a reward for his effort even if his ijtihad  is incorrect. In short, naskh  basically applies
to binding proofs, and qiyas  is not one of them.[10. Amidi,  Ihkam , III, 163ff; Badran, Usul , p. 459.]In his Risalah , Imam Shafi'i has maintained the view that naskh  is not a form of annulment ( ilgha '); it is
rather a suspension or termination of one ruling by another. Naskh  in this sense is a form of explanation
(bayan ) which does not entail a total rejection of the original ruling.[11. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 103, Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 148.]Naskh  is explanatory in the sense that it tells us of the termination of a particular ruling, the manner and
the time of its termination, whether the whole of a ruling or only a part of it is terminated, and of
course, the new ruling which is to take its place. However, the majority of ulema do not accept the view
that naskh is a form of bayan . The fact that naskh  terminates and puts an end to a ruling differentiates it
from bayan , and when a ruling is terminated, it cannot be explained.
There may be instances of conflict between two texts which, after scrutiny, may turn out to be apparent
rather than real, and it may be possible to reconcile them and to eliminate the conflict. One of the two
texts may be general (` amm ) and the other specific ( khass ), in which case the rules of interpretation and
takhsis  (specification) must be applied so as to eliminate the conflict as far as possible. If the two texts
cannot be so reconciled, then the one which is stronger in respect of authenticity ( thubut ) is to be
preferred. If, for example, there be a conflict between the Qur'an and a solitary Hadith, the latter is
weaker and must therefore give way to the Qur'an. The solitary, or Ahad , Hadith may also be abrogated
by the Mutawatir , the Mashhur , or another Ahad , which is dearer in meaning or which is supported by a
stronger chain of narration ( isnad ). But if the two texts happen to be equal on all of these points, then

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 142the prohibitory text is to be given priority over the permissive. Furthermore, in all instances of conflict,
it is essential to determine the time factor. If this can be determined, then the later in time abrogates the
earlier. The chronological sequence between the two rulings can, however, only be established by
means of reliable reports, not by rational argumentation or analogical reasoning.[12. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 83; Badran,
Usul , p. 455.]As a general rule, naskh  is not applicable to the `perspicuous' texts of the Qur'an and Hadith, known as
muhkamat . A text of this nature is often worded in such a way as to preclude the possibility of repeal.
There are also certain subjects to which abrogation does not apply. Included among these are provisions
pertaining to the attributes of God, belief in the principles of the faith, and the doctrine of tawhid and
the hereafter, which could not be subjected to abrogation. Another subject is the Shari'ah  of Islam itself,
which is the last of the revealed laws and can never be abrogated in its entirety.[13. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I,72.] The
ulema are also in agreement that rational matters and moral truths such as the virtue of doing justice or
being good to one's parents, and vices such as the enormity of telling lies, are not changeable and are
therefore not open to abrogation. Thus a vice cannot be turned into a virtue or a virtue into a vice by the
application of naskh . Similarly the nusus  of the Qur'an and Sunnah  which relate the occurrence of
certain events in the past are not open to abrogation. To give an example, the following Qur'anic text is
not amenable to the application of naskh : `As for the Thamud, they were destroyed by a terrible storm,
whereas the `Ad were destroyed by a furious and violent wind' (al-Haqqah, 69:5-6). To apply naskh  to
such reports would imply the attribution of lying to its source, which cannot be entertained.[14. Badran, Usul ,
p.454; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 244. ]To summarise the foregoing: no abrogation can take place unless the following conditions are satisfied.
First, that the text itself has not precluded the possibility of abrogation. An example of this is the
Qur'anic provision concerning persons who are convicted of slanderous accusation ( qadhf ) that they
may never be admitted as witnesses (al-Nur, 24:4). Similarly the Hadith which proclaims that ` jihad
shall remain valid till the day of resurrection', obviously precludes the possibility of abrogating the
permanent validity of jihad .[15. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 702, Hadith no. 2526; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 150.] Second, that the subject is
open to the possibility of repeal. Thus the attributes of God and the principles of belief, moral virtues
and rational truths, etc., are not open to abrogation. Third, that the abrogating text is of a later origin
than the abrogated. Fourth, that the two texts are of equal strength in regard to authenticity ( thubut ) and
meaning ( dalalah ). Thus a textual ruling of the Qur'an may be abrogated either by another Qur'anic text
of similar strength or by a Mutawatir  Hadith, and, according to the Hanafis, even by a Mashhur  Hadith,
as the latter is almost as strong as the Mutawatir . By the same token, one Mutawatir  Hadith may
abrogate another. However, according to the preferred ( rajih ) view, neither the Qur'an nor the
Mutawatir  Hadith may be abrogated by a solitary Hadith. According to Imam Shafi'i, however, the
Sunnah , whether as Mutawatir  or Ahad , may not abrogate the Qur'an.[16. Shafi'i, Risalah , p.54; Amidi, Ihkam , III,146ff.]Fifth, that the two texts are genuinely in conflict and can in no way be reconciled with one another. And
lastly, that the two texts are separate and are not related to one another in the sense of one being the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 143condition ( shart ), qualification ( wasf) or exception ( istithna' ) to the other. For when this is the case, the
issue is likely to be one of specification ( takhsis ), or qualification ( taqyid ) rather than abrogation.[17. Hitu,
Wajiz , p.244; Khallaf, Ilm, p. 223. ]Types of NaskhAbrogation may either be explicit ( sarih ), or implicit ( dimni ). In the case of explicit abrogation, the
abrogating text clearly repeals one ruling and substitutes another in its place. The facts of abrogation,
including the chronological order of the two rulings, the fact that they are genuinely in conflict, and the
nature of each of the two rulings, and so forth, can be ascertained in the relevant texts. An example of
this is the Hadith which provides: `I had forbidden you from visiting the graves. Nay, visit them, for
they remind you of the hereafter.'[18. Tabrizi, Mishkat , I, 552, Hadith no.1762; Muslim, Sahih , p.340.]In another Hadith the Prophet is reported to have said, `I had forbidden you from storing away the
sacrificial meat because of the large crowds. You may now store it as you wish.'[19. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 83. Amidi,
Ihkam , III, 181. ]The initial order not to store the sacrificial meat during the id festival (` id al-Adha ) was given in view
of the large number of visitors who attended the festival in Madinah, where the Prophet desired that
they should be provided with necessary foodstuffs. The restriction was later removed as the
circumstances had changed. In both these examples, the text leaves no doubt as to the nature of the two
rulings and all the other relevant facts of abrogation. An example of explicit abrogation in the Qur'an is
the passage in sura al-Baqarah (2: 142-144) with regard to the change in the direction of the qiblah  from
Jerusalem to the Ka'bah. The relevant text of the Qur'an as to the direction of the qiblah  before and after
the new ruling is clear, and leaves no doubt with regard to the facts of abrogation and the nature of the
change which was effected thereby.[20. Another instance of explicit naskh  in the Qur'an is the passage in sura al-Anfal (8:65-66) which
encouraged the Muslims to fight the unbelievers. The passage reads as follows: 'If there be of you twenty steadfast persons, they shall overcome two hundred, and
if there be one hundred of you, they shall overcome one thousand.' The subsequent ayah reviewed these figures as follows: `Now Allah has lightened your burden
[...] if there be of you one hundred steadfast persons, they shall overcome two hundred, and if there be of you one thousand, they shall overcome two thousand.']In the case of implicit abrogation, the abrogating text does not clarify all the relevant facts. Instead we
have a situation where the Lawgiver introduces a ruling which is in conflict with a previous ruling and
the two cannot be reconciled, while it remains somewhat doubtful whether the two rulings present a
genuine case for abrogation. An example of implicit abrogation is the ruling in sura al-Baqarah (2:180)
which permitted bequests to one's parents and relatives. This was subsequently abrogated by another
text (al-Nisa, 4:11) which entitled the legal heirs to specific shares in inheritance. Notwithstanding the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 144fact that the two rulings are not diametrically opposed to one another and could both be implemented in
certain cases,[21. Shafi'i ( Risalah , p. 69) has observed concerning these ayat that the abrogation of bequest to relatives by the ayah  of inheritance is a
probability only, but he adds that the ulema have held that the ayah  of inheritance has abrogated the ayah  of bequests. On the same page, Shafi'i quotes the Hadith
that `there shall be no bequest to an heir.' It thus appears that in his view, the abrogation of bequest to legal heirs in the Qur'an is a probability which has been
confirmed and explained by this and other ahadith on the subject.] the majority of ulema have held that the initial ruling which
validated bequests to relatives has been abrogated by the rules of inheritance. They have held that the
ayah of inheritance prescribes specific portions for legal heirs which can be properly implemented only
if they were observed in their entirety, and that the Qur'anic scheme of inheritance is precise and self-
contained, and any outside interference is likely to upset the individual shares as well as the overall
balance between them. Since bequest to legal heirs is seen as a principal source of such interference it is
totally forbidden. This analysis is substantiated by the explicit ruling of a Hadith in which the Prophet is
reported to have said, `God has assigned a portion to all who are entitled. Hence there shall be no
bequest to legal heirs .' [22. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 69; Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 808, Hadith no. 2864; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 224. ]Implicit abrogation has been sub-divided into two types, namely total abrogation ( naskh kulli ) and
partial abrogation ( naskh juzi ). In the case of the former, the whole of a particular nass is abrogated by
another, and a new ruling is enacted to replace it. This may be illustrated by a reference to the two
Qur'anic texts concerning the waiting period (` iddah ) of widows, which was initially prescribed to be
one year but was subsequently changed to four months and ten days. The two texts are as follows:
1. Those of you who are about to die and leave widows should bequeath for their widows a year's
maintenance and residence; but if they leave the residence, you are not responsible for what
they do of themselves (al-Baqarah, 2:240).
 
2. 
3. Those of you who die and leave widows, the latter must observe a waiting period of four
months and ten days; when they have fulfilled their term, you are not responsible for what they
do of themselves (al-Baqarah, 2:234)
4. 
As can be seen, the provision concerning the waiting period of widows in the first ayah  has been totally
replaced by the new ruling in the second. There is no doubt on the point that both of these rulings are
exclusively concerned with the same subject, namely, the widows. Both ayat require them to observe a
waiting period, whose length varies in each, and only one must be observed, not both. The two passages
are thus in conflict and the latter abrogates the former. But this is a case, as already noted, of an implicit
naskh , in that the two ayat do not expound, with complete clarity, all the facts of abrogation and it is not
certain whether they are genuinely in conflict, for the term `a year's maintenance and residence' in the
first ayah does not recur in the second. There is, in fact, no reference to either maintenance or residence
in the second ayah . This would, for example, introduce an element of doubt concerning whether the two

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 145ayat are concerned with different subjects of maintenance and ` iddah respectively. There is, in other
words, a level of discrepancy which might make it possible to apply each of the two rulings to different
situations. This is not to argue against the majority view which seems to be the settled law, but merely
to explain why an abrogation of this type has been classified as implicit naskh .
Partial abrogation ( naskh juz'i ) is a form of naskh  in which one text is only partially abrogated by
another, while the remaining part continues to be operative. An example of this is the Qur'anic ayah of
qadhf  (slanderous accusation) which has been partially repealed by the ayah of imprecation ( li'an). The
two texts are as follows:
1. Those who accuse chaste women [of adultery] and then fail to bring four witnesses to prove it
shall be flogged with eighty lashes (al-Nur, 24:4).
 
2. Those who accuse their spouses and have no witnesses, other than their own words, to support
their claim, must take four solemn oaths in the name of God and testify that they are telling the
truth (al-Nur, 24:6).
The first ayah  lays down the general rule that anyone, be it a spouse or otherwise, who accuses chaste
women of zina must produce four witnesses for proof. The second ayah  provides that if the accuser
happens to be a spouse who cannot provide four witnesses and yet insists on pursuing the charge of
zina, he may take four solemn oaths to take the place of four witnesses. This is to be followed, as the
text continues, by a statement in which the husband invokes the curse of God upon himself if he tells a
lie. The ruling of the first text has thus been repealed by the second text insofar as it concerns a married
couple.[23. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 72; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.227.]It will be noted that the text of the Qur'an has two distinctive features, namely, the words of the text,
and the ruling, or the hukm , that it conveys. Reading and reciting the words of the Qur'an, even if its
ruling is abrogated, still commands spiritual merit. The words are still regarded as part of the Qur'an
and salah  can be performed by reciting them. It is on the basis of this distinction between the words and
the rulings of the Qur'an that naskh  has once again been classified into three types. The first and the
most typical variety of abrogation is referred to as naskh al-hukm , or naskh  in which the ruling alone is
abrogated while the words of the text are retained. All the examples which we have given so far of the
incidence of naskh  in the Qur'an fall into this category. Thus the words of the Qur'anic text concerning
bequests to relatives (al-Baqarah, 2:180) and the one concerning the ` iddah  of widows (al-Baqarah, 2:
240) are still a part of the Qur'an despite the fact that they have both been abrogated. We still recite

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 146them as such, but do not apply the law that they convey. The other two varieties of naskh , respectively
referred to as naskh al-tilawah (sometimes as naskh al-qira'ah ), that is, abrogation of the words of the
text while the ruling is retained, and naskh al-hukm wa al-tilawah , that is, abrogation of both the words
and the ruling - are rather rare and the examples which we have are not supported by conclusive
evidence. Having said this, however, we might add that, except for a minority of Mu'tazili scholars, the
ulema are generally in agreement on the occurrence of abrogation in both these forms.[24. Amidi, Ihkam , III,141.]An example of naskh al-tilawah is the passage which, according to a report attributed to `Umar b. al-
Khattab, was a part of the Qur'an, although the passage in question does not appear in the standard text.
However the ruling conveyed by the passage in question still represents authoritative law. The reported
version of this text provides: `When a married man or a married woman commits zina, their punishment
shall be stoning as a retribution ordained by God.'[25. The Arabic version reads ' al-Shaykhu wa'l-shaykhatu idha zanaya farjumuhuma
albattatas nakalan min Allah.' Both Ghazali ( Mustasfa , I, 80, and Amidi, Ihkam  III, 141) have quoted it. 'Umar b. al-Khattab is quoted to have added: 'Had it not
been for fear of people saying that `Umar made an addition to the Qur'an, I would have added this to the text of the Qur'an']In the event where the words of the text, and the law that they convey, are both repealed, then the text in
question is of little significance. According to a report which is attributed to the Prophet's widow,
`A'ishah, it had been revealed in the Qur'an that ten clear suckings by a child, make marriage unlawful
between that child and others who drank the same, woman's milk. Then it was abrogated and substituted
by five suckings and it was then that the Messenger of God died. The initial ruling which required ten
suckings was read into the text of the Qur'an. The ruling was then repealed and the words in which it
was conveyed were also omitted from the text. However since neither of these reports is established by
tawatur , they are not included in the Qur'an. The position now, according to the majority of ulema, is
that either five clear suckings, or any amount which reaches the stomach, even if it be one large
sucking, constitutes the grounds of prohibition.[26. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 154; Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 80; Denffer ` Ulum , p. 108.]According to the majority ( jumhur ) view, the Qur'an and the Sunnah  may be abrogated by themselves
or by one another. In this sense, abrogation may be once again classified into the following varieties:
(1) Abrogation of the Qur'an by the Qur'an, which has already been illustrated. (2) Abrogation of the
Sunnah  by the Sunnah . This too has been illustrated by the two ahadith  which we quoted under the
rubric of explicit abrogation. (3) Abrogation of the Qur'an by Sunnah . An example of this is the ayah  of
bequest in sura al-Baqarah (2:180) which has been abrogated by the Hadith which provides that `there
shall be no bequest to an heir'. It is generally agreed that `the Qur'an itself does not abrogate the ayah  of
bequest and there remains little doubt that it has been abrogated by the Sunnah '.[27. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 252. See also
Qadri, Islamic Jurisprudence , p. 230.] (4) Abrogation of the Sunnah  by the Qur'an. An example of this is the initial
ruling of the Prophet which determined the qiblah in the direction of Jerusalem. When the Prophet
migrated to Madinah, he ordered the believers to pray in the direction of Jerusalem. This was later
repealed by the Qur'an (al-Baqarah, 2:144) which ordered the Muslims to turn their faces toward the
holy mosque of the Ka'bah.[28. Hitu, Wajiz , p. 252. See also Qadri, Islamic Jurisprudence , p. 230. ] The Qur'an, in other words,
abrogated a practice that was initially authorised by the Sunnah .

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 147The main exception to the foregoing classification of naskh  is taken by Imam Shafi'i, the majority of the
Mu'tazilah, and Ahmad b. Hanbal (according to one of two variant reports), who have validated the first
two types of abrogation, but have overruled the validity of the remaining two. In their view, abrogation
of the Qur'an by the Sunnah  and vice versa is not valid.[29. Amidi, Ihkam , III,153] This is the conclusion that al-
Shafi'i has drawn from his interpretation of a number of Qur'anic ayat where it is indicated that the
Qur'an can only be abrogated by the Qur'an itself.[30. Shafi'i, Risalah , p.54ff; Amidi, Ihkam , III,156ff.] Thus we read in
sura al-Nahl (16:101):
And when We substitute one ayah  in place of another ayah [ayatun makana ayatin ],
and God knows best what He reveals.
This text, according to al-Shafi`i, is self-evident on the point that an ayah  of the Qur'an can only be
abrogated or replaced by another ayah . The fact that the ayah  occurs twice in this text provides
conclusive evidence that the Qur'an may not be abrogated by the Sunnah . In another place, the Qur'an
reads:
None of our revelations do We abrogate [ma nansakh min ayatin ] or cause to be
forgotten unless We substitute for them something better or similar (at-Baqarah,2:106).
The text in this ayah  is once again clear on the point that in the matter of naskh , the Qur'an refers only
to itself. The Qur'an, in other words, is self-contained in regard to naskh , and this precludes the
possibility of it being abrogated by the Sunnah . Naskh  in the Qur'an, according to al-Shafi'i, is a wholly
internal phenomenon, and there is no evidence in the Qur'an to suggest that it can be abrogated by the
Sunnah . Indeed the Qur'an asks the Prophet to declare that he himself cannot change any part of the
Qur'an. This is the purport of the text in sura Yunus (10:1 5) which provides: `Say: it is not for me to
change it of my own accord. I only follow what is revealed to me.' It is thus not within the Prophet's
terms of reference to abrogate the Qur'an at his own initiative. 'The Sunnah  in principle', writes al-
Shafi`i, 'follows, substantiates, and clarifies the Qur'an; it does not seek to abrogate the Book of God'.[31.
Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 54. ] All this al-Shafi'i adds, is reinforced in yet another passage in the Qur'an where it is
provided: 'God blots out or confirms what He pleases. With Him is the Mother of the Book' (al-Ra'd,
13: 39). The reference here is again to naskh  and the source in which it originates is the Mother of the
Book, that, is the Qur'an itself. The Sunnah , even the Mutawatir Sunnah , may not abrogate the Qur'an.
AI-Shafi'i is equally categorical on the other limb of this theory, namely that the Qur'an does not
abrogate the Sunnah  either. Only the Sunnah  can abrogate the Sunnah : Mutawatir  by Mutawatir  and

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 148Ahad  by Ahad . Mutawatir  may abrogate the Ahad , but there is some disagreement on whether the Ahad
can abrogate the Mutawatir . According to the preferred view, which is also held by al-Shafi'i, the Ahad ,
however, can abrogate the Mutawatir . To illustrate this, al-Shafi'i refers to the incident when the
congregation of worshippers at the mosque of Quba' were informed by a single person ( khabar al-
wahid ) of the change of the direction of the qiblah  from Jerusalem to the Ka'bah; they acted upon it and
turned their faces toward the Ka'bah. The fact that Jerusalem was the qiblah  had been established by
continuous, or mutawatir, Sunnah , but the congregation of Companions accepted the solitary report as
the abrogater of Mutawatir .[32. Shafi'i, Risalah , p.177; Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 81.]Al-Shafi'i elaborates his doctrine further. If there existed any occasion for the Sunnah  to abrogate the
Qur'an or vice versa, the Prophet would be the first to say so. Thus in all cases where such an
abrogation is warranted, there is bound to be a Sunnah  of the Prophet to that effect, in which case the
matter automatically becomes a part of the Sunnah . The Sunnah  in other words is self-contained, and
covers all possible cases of conflict and abrogation of the Qur'an by the Sunnah  and vice versa. If any
Sunnah  is meant to be abrogated, the Prophet himself would do it by virtue of another Sunnah , hence
there is no case for the abrogation of Sunnah  by the Qur'an.[33. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 102. ]Al-Shafi'i considers it necessary for the abrogation of Sunnah  that the Prophet should have informed the
people specifically about it. If the Qur'an were to abrogate the Sunnah , while the Prophet has not
indicated such to be the case, then, to give an example, all the varieties of sale which the Prophet had
banned prior to the revelation of the Qur'anic ayah  on the legality of sale (al-Baqarah, 2:275) would be
rendered lawful with the revelation of this ayah . Similarly, the punishment of stoning for zina which is
authorised by the Prophet would be deemed abrogated by the variant ruling of one hundred lashes in
sura al-Nur (24:2). In the case of theft, too, the Prophet did not punish anyone for theft below the value
of one-quarter of a dinar, nor did he apply the prescribed punishment to the theft of unguarded ( ghayr
muhraz ) property. These would all be deemed abrogated following the revelation of the ayah  in sura al-
Ma'idah (5:83) which prescribes mutilation of the hand for theft without any qualification whatsoever.
If we were to open this process, it would be likely to give rise to unwarranted claims of conflict and a
fear of departure from the Sunnah .[34. Shafi'i, Risalah , pp. 57-58. In raising the fear of departure from the Sunnah , Shafi'i was probably
thinking of the doubts that would arise with regard to establishing the precise chronological order between the Qur'an and Sunnah  in all possible cases of conflict.
Since the Qur'an is generally authentic, any doubts of this nature are likely to undermine the Sunnah  more than the Qur’an.]Notwithstanding the strong case that al-Shafi'i has made in support of his doctrine, the majority opinion,
which admits abrogation of the Qur'an and Sunnah  by one another is preferable, as it is based on the
factual evidence of having actually taken place. AI-Ghazali is representative of the majority opinion on
this when he writes that identity of source ( tajanus ) is not necessary in naskh . The Qur'an and Sunnah
may abrogate one another as they issue both from the same provenance. While referring to al-Shafi'i's
doctrine, al-Ghazali comments: `how can we sustain this in the face of the evidence that the Qur'an
never validated Jerusalem as the qiblah ; it was validated by the Sunnah , but its abrogating text occurs in

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 149the Qur'an? Likewise, the fasting of `Ashura' was abrogated by the Qur'anic provision concerning the
fasting of Ramadan while the former was only established by the Sunnah . Furthermore, the Qur'anic
ayah  which permitted conjugal intercourse at night-time in Ramadan (al-Baqarah, 2:178) abrogated the
prohibition that the Sunnah  had previously imposed on conjugal relations during Ramadan'.[35. Ghazali,
Mustasfa , I, 81; see also Amidi, Ihkam , III, 150ff.]Abrogation, Specification ( Takhsis ) and Addition ( Taz'id )Naskh  and takhsis  resemble one another in that both tend to qualify or specify an original ruling in some
way. This is particularly true, perhaps, of partial naskh , which really amounts to qualification /
specification rather than repeal. We have already noted al-Shafi'i's perception of naskh which draws
close to the idea of the coexistence of two rulings and an explanation of one by the other. A certain
amount of confusion has also arisen between naskh and takhsis due to conceptual differences between
the Hanafis and the majority of ulema regarding naskh  in that they tend to view naskh  differently from
one another. These differences of perspective have, however, been treated more pertinently in our
discussion of the Amm  and the Khass . In this section, we shall outline the basic differences between
naskh and takhsis  without attempting to expound the differences between the various schools on the
subject.
Naskh  and takhsis differ from one another in that there is no real conflict in takhsis . The two texts,
namely the general text and the specifying text, in effect complement one another. This is not, however,
the case with naskh , in which it is necessary that the two rulings are genuinely in conflict and that they
could not coexist. Another difference between naskh  and takhsis  is that naskh  can occur in respect of
either a general or a specific ruling whereas takhsis  can, by definition, occur in respect of a general
ruling only.[36. Gha zali, Mustasfa , I,71; Badran, Usul , p.452.]As already stated, naskh  is basically confined to the Qur'an and Sunnah  and could only be effected by
the explicit rulings of divine revelation. Takhsis  on the other hand could also occur by means of
rationality and circumstantial evidence. Naskh , in other words, can only occur by shar' whereas takhsis
can occur by rationality (` aql ), custom (` urf) and other rational proofs. It would follow from this that
takhsis (i.e. the specification or qualification of a general text) is possible by means of speculative
evidence such as qiyas and solitary Hadith. But in the case of naskh , a definitive ruling, that is, a qat'i,
can only be abrogated by another qat'i ruling. Abrogation, in other words, is basically not operative
with regard to speculative rul ings.[37. Amidi, Ihkam , III, 113; Badran, Usul , p.453.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 150As already stated, in naskh  it is essential that the abrogator ( al-nasikh ) be later in time than the ruling
which it seeks to abrogate. There can be no naskh  if this order is reversed, nor even when the two
rulings are known to have been simultaneous. But this is not a requirement of takhsis . With regard to
takhsis , the Hanafis maintain that the 'Amm and the Khass  must in fact be either simultaneous or
parallel in time. But according to the majority, the ` Amm , and the Khass , can precede or succeed one
another and they need not be in any particular chronological order.
Lastly, naskh  does not apply to factual reports of events ( akhbar ) whereas takhsis  could occur in regard
to factual reports. Thus a news report may be specified or qualified, but cannot be abrogated. The
closest concept to abrogation in regard to reports is that they can be denied.
Another issue which arises concerning naskh  is whether a subsequent addition ( taz'id ) to an existing
text, which may be at variance with it, amounts to its abrogation. When new materials are added to an
existing law, the added materials may fall into one of the following two categories: (1) The addition
may be independent of the original text but relate to the same subject, such as adding a sixth salah  to
the existing five. Does this amount to the abrogation of the original ruling? The majority of ulema have
answered this question in the negative, holding that the new addition does not overrule the existing law
but merely adds a new element to it. (2) The new addition may not be independent of the original text in
that it may be dealing with something that constitutes an integral part of the original ruling. A
hypothetical example of this would be to add another unit ( rak'ah ), or an additional prostration ( sajdah )
to one or more of the existing obligatory prayers. Another example would be to add to the existing
requirement of releasing a slave in expiation for breaking the fast, a new condition that the slave has to
be a Muslim. Does this kind of addition amount to the abrogation of the existing law? The ulema have
differed on this, but once again the majority have held the view that it does not amount to abrogation as
it does not seek to overrule the original text. The Hanafis have held, however, that such an addition
does amount to abrogation. It is on this ground that the Hanafis have considered the ruling of the  Ahad
Hadith on the admissibility of one witness plus a solemn oath by the claimant to be abrogating the
Qur'anic text which enacts two witnesses as standard legal proof (al-Baqarah, 2:282). The abrogation,
however, does not occur, not because the Hanafis consider the new addition to be immaterial, but
because the Ahad  cannot repeal the Mutawatir of the Qur'an.[38. Amidi, Ihkam , III,170; Hitu, Wajiz , p.256.] The
majority opinion does not regard this to be a case for abrogation. For the Qur'anic text on the
requirement of two witnesses does not preclude the possibility of proof by other methods. Since the
original Qur'anic text does not impose an obligatory command, it leaves open the possibility of recourse
to alternative methods of proof.[39. Amidi, Ihkam , III, 175; Hitu, Wajiz , p. 257.]The Argument Against Naskh

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 151As already stated, the ulema are not unanimous over the occurrence of naskh  in the Qur'an. While al-
Suyuti has claimed, in his Itqan fi `Ulum al-Qur'an , twenty-one instances of naskh  in the Qur'an, Shah
Wali Allah (d. 1762) has only retained five of al-Suyuti's twenty-one cases as genuine, stating that the
rest can all be reconciled.[40. Subhi al-Salih ( Mabahith , p.280) records the view that only ten of al-Suyuti's twenty-one instances of naskh  in the
Quran are genuine and that all the rest can be reconciled.] Another scholar, Abu Muslim al-1sfahani (d. 934) has, on the
other hand, denied the incidence of abrogation in the Qur'an altogether.[41. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.155; Denffer, ' Ulum , p.
110.] The majority of ulema have nevertheless acknowledged the incidence of  naskh in the Qur'an on the
authority of the Qur'an itself. This is the conclusion that the majority have drawn from the relevant
Qur'anic passages. However, it will be noted that the counter-argument is also based on the same
Qur'anic passages which have been quoted in support of naskh . The following two ayat need to be
quoted again:
None of our revelations do We abrogate nor cause to be forgotten unless We substitute
for them something better or similar [ ma nansakh min ayatin aw nunsiha na'ti bi-
khayrin minha aw mithliha ] (al-Baqarah, 2:106).
Elsewhere we read in sura al-Nahl (16:106):
When We substitute one revelation for another, and God knows best what He reveals
[wa idha baddalna ayatan makana ayatin wa' Llahu a'lam bima yunazzil ].
To some commentators, the word ' ayah ' to these passages refers, not to the text of the Qur'an itself, but
to previous scriptures including the Torah and the Gospel. An interpretation of this type would, of
course, render the ayah  under discussion irrelevant to the occurrence of naskh  in the Qur'an. Abu
Muslim al-Isfahani, a Mu'tazili scholar and author of a Qur'an commentary (Jami al-Ta'wil), has held
the view that all instances of so-called abrogation in the Qur'an are in effect no more than qualifications
and takhsis  of one text by another.[42. Subhi al-Salih, Mabahith , p.274.] To al-Isfahani, the word ' ayah ' in these
passages means not a portion of the Qur'anic text, but 'miracle'. To read this meaning in the first of the
two passages quoted above would imply that God empowered each of His Messengers with miracles
that none other possessed; that God provided each of His Messengers with superior miracles, one better
than the other. That this is the correct meaning of the text is substantiated, al-Isfahani adds, by the
subsequent portion of the same passage (i.e. al-Baqarah, 2:106) which reads: 'Do you not know that
God is all-powerful?' (` ala kulli shay'in qadir ). Thus this particular attribute of God relates more
appropriately in this context to the subject of miracles rather than abrogation of one ayah  by another.
This interpretation finds further support in yet another portion of the same passage (i.e. 2:108) which

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 152provides in an address to the Muslim community: `Would you want to question your Prophet as Moses
was questioned before?' It is then explained that Moses was questioned by the Bani Isra'il regarding his
miracles, not the abrogation as such?[43. Amidi,  Ihkam , III, 120.] The word ` ayah ', in the second passage (i.e. al-
Nahl, 16:101) too means 'miracle'. For after all, ' ayah ' literally means 'sign' and a miracle is a sign. AI-
Isfahani further argues: Naskh  is equivalent to ibtal, that is, 'falsification' or rendering something
invalid, and ibtal as such has no place in the Qur'an. This is what we learn from the Qur'an itself which
reads in sura Ha-Mim (41:42): 'No falsehood can approach it [the Book] from any direction [ la ya'tihi
al-batil min bayn yadayhi wa la min khalfih ].' In response to this, however, it is said that naskh  a not
identical with ibtal; that naskh  for all intents and purposes means suspension of a textual ruling, while
the words of the text are often retained and not nullified.[44. Amidi,  Ihkam , III, 124.]Two other points that al-Isfahani has added to his interpretation are as follows. Supposing that the
passages under consideration do mean abrogation, even then they do not confirm the actual occurrence
of naskh  but merely the possibility of it, and there is a difference between the two. Lastly, al-Isfahani
maintains that all instances of conflict in the Qur'an are apparent rather than real, and can be reconciled
and removed. This, he adds, is only logical of the Shari'ah , which is meant to be for all times; this is
just another way of saying that it is not open to abrogation.[45. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.155; Badran, Usul , p.448.]Having explained al-Isfahani's refutation of the theory of naskh , it remains to be said that according to
the majority of ulema, the occurrence of naskh  in the Qur'an is proven, although not in so many
instances as has often been claimed. The proponents of naskh  have stated that the incidence of naskh  in
the Qur'an is proven, not only by the Qur'an itself, but also by a conclusive ijma. Anyone who opposes
it is thus going against the dictates of ijma.[46. Al-Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 72.] In the face of the foregoing
disagreements, it is admittedly difficult to see the existence of a conclusive ijma'  on the point. But
according to the rules of ijma`, once an ijma' is properly concluded, any subsequent differences of
opinion would not invalidate it. Divergent views such as that of al-Isfahani seem to have been treated in
this light, and almost totally ignored.
In his book The Islamic Theory of International Relations: New Directions For Islamic Methodology
and Thought (originally a doctoral dissertation), Abdul Hamid Abu Sulayman is critical of the classical
approach to naskh  and calls for a fresh and comprehensive understanding `of the technique of naskh  [..
.] on a systematic and conceptual basis, not a legalistic one' [47. Abu Sulayman , The Islamic Theory , p.84. ] The author is
of the view that the classical exposition of naskh  is unnecessarily restrictive as it tends to narrow down
the 'rich Islamic and Qur'anic experience', and also indulges, in some instances at least, in a measure of
exaggeration and excess.[48. Abu Sulayman, The Islamic Theory , p. 107.]The author maintains that abrogation was primarily an historical, rather than juridical, phenomenon and
ought to have been read in that context. This may be part of the reason why the jurists have found it
difficult to establish the validity of abrogation by the direct evidence of the Qur'an or Sunnah . The

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 153argument runs that the facts of naskh  in regard to, for example, the ayah  of the sword, as discussed
below, were historical and were largely dictated by the prevailing pattern of relationship between
Muslims and non-Muslims at the time. Now, instead of understanding naskh  as a circumstance of
history, the ulema turned it into a juridical doctrine of permanent validity. This classical concept of
permanent abrogation is oblivious of the space-time element which, if taken into account, would have
restricted the application of naskh  to those circumstance alone.[49. Abu Sulayman, The Islamic Theory , p. 73.]The broad sweep of naskh  was, however, taken so far as to invalidate a major portion of the Qur'an.
This is precisely the case with regard to the ayah  of the sword ( ayah al-sayf ) which reads, in the
relevant part: `And fight the polytheists all together as they fight you all together, and know that God is
with those who keep their duty [to Him]' (al-Tawbah, 9:36). Influenced by the prevailing pattern of
hostile relations with non-Muslims, 'some jurists took an extreme position in interpreting this  ayah ,' and
claimed that it abrogated all preceding ayat pertaining to patience, tolerance and the right of others to
self-determination.[50. Abu Sulayman, The Islamic Theory , p. 36.] Although scholars are not in agreement as to the exact
number of ayat that were abrogated as a result, Mustafa Abu Zayd has found that the ayah  of the sword
abrogated no less than 140 ayat in the holy Book.[51. Abu Zayd, Al-Nasikh wa al-Mansukh , I, 289 ff and II, 503 ff.] Jurists who
were inclined to stress the aggressive aspect of jihad  could only do so by applying abrogation to a large
number of Qur'anic ayat, and 'using abrogation in this manner has, Abu Sulayman contests, `indeed
narrowed the Qur'anic experience' [52. Abu Sulayman, The Islamic Theory , p.36.] and undermined the egalitarian
substance of its teachings. In many passages the Qur'an calls for peace, compassion and forgiveness,
and promotes a set of moral values such as moderation, humility, patience and tolerance whose scope
could not be said to be confined to relations among Muslims alone.
The Muslim jurists of the second hijrah  century, as al-Zuhayli informs us, considered war as the norm,
rather than the exception, in relations with non-Muslims, and they were able to do so partly because of a
certain exaggeration in the use and application of naskh . The reason behind this attitude was the need,
which was then prevalent, to be in a state of constant readiness for battle in order to protect Islam.[53.
Wahbah al-Zuhayli, Athar al-Harb , p.130.] Under such political circumstances, it is not difficult to understand how
abrogation was utilised as a means by which to strengthen the morale of the Muslim in facing their
enemies.[54. Abu Sulayman, The Islamic Theory , p.74. ]  It is to be noted further that the position of the classical jurists
which characterised war as the permanent pattern of relationship with non-Muslims, as al-Zuhayli
points out, is not binding on anyone, and is not supported by the balance of evidence in the Qur'an and
Sunnah .[55. Al-Zuhayli, Athar al-Harb , p.135.]It is therefore important, Abu Sulayman tells us, 'to put the concept of naskh  back in proper context' and
confine its application only to clear cases, such as the change of qiblah  from the direction of Jerusalem
to the Ka'bah. As for the rest, the rules and teachings of Islam are valid and applicable in unlimited
combinations as they meet the needs and benefits of mankind, in the light of the broader values and

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 154objectives that the Qur'an and Sunnah  have upheld.[56. cf. Abu Sulayman, The Islamic Theory , p. 107; cf. the review of his book by
James Piscatori, in Journal of the Institute of Muslim Minority Affairs , 10.2 (July 1989), pp. 542-3.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 155Chapter Eight: Ijma'  or Consensus of OpinionIt must be noted at the outset that unlike the Qur'an and Sunnah , ijma does not directly partake in divine
revelation. As a doctrine and proof of Shari'ah , ijma' is basically a rational proof. The theory of ijma' is
also clear on the point that it is a binding proof. But it seems that the very nature of this high status that
is accorded to ijma` has  demanded that only an absolute and universal consensus would qualify
although absolute consensus on the rational content of  ijma' has often been difficult to obtain. It is only
natural and reasonable to accept  ijma` as  a reality and a valid concept in a relative sense, but factual
evidence falls short of establishing the universality of ijma`. The classical definition and the essential
requirements of ijma`, as laid down by the ulema of usul, are categorical on the point that nothing less
than a universal consensus of the scholars of the Muslim community as a whole can be regarded as
conclusive ijma' . There is thus no room whatsoever for disagreement, or ikhtilaf , within the concept of
ijma' . The theory of ijma' is equally unreceptive to the idea of relativity, or a preponderance of
agreement within its ranks.
The notion of a universal ijma ` was probably inspired by the ideal of the political unity of the ummah ,
and its unity in faith and tawhid , rather than total consensus on juridical matters. As evidence will show,
ijma' on particular issues, especially on matters that are open to ijtihad , is extremely difficult to prove.
Thus the gap between the theory and practice of ijma` remains a striking feature of this doctrine. A
universal ijma` can only be said to exist, as al-Shafi'i has observed, on the obligatory duties, that is, the
five pillars of the faith, and other such matters on which the Qur'an and the Sunnah  are unambiguous
and decisive. However, the weakness of such an observation becomes evident when one is reminded
that ijma` is redundant in the face of a decisive ruling of the Qur'an or the Sunnah .
The Shari'ah  has often been considered as `a diversity within unity'. This is true in a general sense, in
that there is unity to the essentials and in the broad outlines of the ahkam . But the same cannot be said
of the detailed rulings of the jurists. It is admittedly true to say, again in a general sense, that the ikhtilaf
of individual jurists, or of the various schools of law, are different manifestations of the same divine
will and may therefore be regarded as an essential unity. But to expect universal consensus on ijtihadi
matters is totally unrealistic, as many prominent ulema have recognised.
The gap between the theory and practice of ijma` is reflected in the difficulty that many jurists have
acknowledged to exist over implementing its theoretical requirements. The absolute terms of the
classical definition of ijma` have hardly been fulfilled by conclusive factual evidence that would
eliminate all levels of ikhtilaf . Ijma' has often been claimed for rulings on which only a majority
consensus had existed within or beyond a particular school. The proof and authenticity of ijma ` has, on

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 156the other hand, not received the kind of attention that has been given to the authentication of Hadith
through a reliable isnad . The only form of ijma' which has been generally upheld is that of the
Companions of the Prophet, which is partly due to their special status and not always due to their
participation and consensus. With these introductory remarks, then, we may begin to examine the
meaning and definition of ijma' , and then proceed to discuss some of the issues we have raised.
Ijma` is the verbal noun of the Arabic word ajma'a , which has two meanings: to determine, and to agree
upon something. To give an example of the former, the expression ajma `a fulan `ala kadha , means `so-
and-so decided upon such-and-such'. This usage of ajma`a is found both in the Qur'an and in the
Hadith.[1. In the Qur'an the phrase fajma'u amrakum which occurs in sura Yunus (10:71) means 'determine your plan'. Similarly fajma'u kaydakum in sura
Taha (20:64), where the Prophet Noah addresses his estranged followers, means 'determine your trick'. The Hadith la siyama liman lam yajma'al-siyama min al-
layl means that fasting is not valid unless it is determined (or intended) in advance; i.e. from the night before. For details see Amidi, Ihkam , I, 195; Shawkani,
Irshad , p.70.] The other meaning of ajma'a  is `unanimous agreement'. Hence the phrase ajma'a al-qawm ala
kadha means `the people reached a unanimous agreement on such-and-such'. The second meaning of
ijma` often subsumes the first, in that whenever there is a unanimous agreement on something, there is
also a decision on that matter.
Ijma` is defined as the unanimous agreement of the mujtahidun , of the Muslim community of any
period following the demise of the Prophet Muhammad on any matter.[2. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 196, Shawkani, Irshad , p.71.
Abu Zahrah and `Abd al-Wahhab Khallaf's definition of ijma` differs with that of Amidi and Shawkani on one point, namely the subject matter of ijma `, which is
confined to shar'i  matters only (see Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.156 and Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 45).] In this definition, the reference to the
mujtahidun  precludes the agreement of laymen from the purview of ijma`. Similarly, by reference to the
mujtahidun  of any period, is meant a period in which there exist a number of mujtahidun  at the time an
incident occurs. Hence it would be of no account if a mujtahid  or a number of mujtahidun  become
available only after the occurrence of an incident The reference in the definition to any matter implies
that ijma` applies to all juridical ( shar'i ), intellectual ( aqli), customary ( urfi,) and linguistic ( lughawi )
matters.[3. Shawkani, Irshad , p.71.] Furthermore, shar'i , in this context is used in contradistinction to hissi, that
is, matters which are perceptible to the senses and fall beyond the scope of  ijma `. Some ulema have
confined ijma' to religious, and others to shar'i  matters, but the majority of ulema do not restrict ijma`
to either. Although the majority of jurists consider dogmatics ( itiqadiyat ) to fall within the ambit of
ijma`, some have expressed the view that ijma` may not be invoked in support of such subjects as the
existence of God or the truth of the prophet hood of Muhammad. The reason is that such beliefs precede
ijma` itself. Ijma` derives its validity from the nusus  on the infallibility (` ismah ) of the ummah . These
nusus , in turn, take for granted the existence of God and the Prophethood of Muhammad. Now if one
attempts to cite ijma` in support of these dogmas, this would amount to circumlocution. To illustrate the
point further, it may be said that the Qur'an cannot be proved by the Sunnah , because the Qur'an
precedes the Sunnah .[4. According to one view, attributed to the Qadi `Abd al-Jabbar, matters pertaining to warfare, agriculture, commerce, politics
and administration are described as worldly affairs, and ijma` is no authority regarding them. One reason given in support of this view is that the Prophet himself
precluded these matters from the scope of the Sunnah  and the same rule is to be applied to ijma`. Amidi, however, confirms the majority view when he adds (in his

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 157Ihkam , I, 284) that these restrictions do not apply to ijma' .] Matters of a practical type witch do not partake in the nature of
tashri ` (legislation) do not constitute the proper subject of ijma`. For example, the agreement of the
Companions to send out troops to Syria or to Persia, or their agreement on setting up certain
government departments, etc., did not constitute ijma`. For these were practical decisions which were
valid in connection with particular circumstances and did not bind the succeeding generations of
Muslims. Ijma' on a shar`i ruling, on the other hand, has a quality of permanence and its validity is not
confined by a time limit.[5. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 165.]Although the theory refuses to impose any restriction on the subject-matter of ijma`, in actual terms the
application of ijma` is  bound to be subject to some reservations. For example, ijma' must be of a
somewhat limited application in regard to rational and linguistic matters. To say that lying is evil, or
that `hand' also means `power', need not be supported by ijma' . In actual terms, ijma' has always been
selective in determining its own subject-matter. It was perhaps in view of the dynamic nature of ijma`
and its infallibility that the ulema were persuaded not to impose any advance reservations on its scope.
It is clear from its definition that ijma' can only occur after the demise of the Prophet. For during his
lifetime, the Prophet alone was the highest authority on Shari'ah , hence the agreement or disagreement
of others did not affect the overriding authority of the Prophet. In all probability, ijma` occurred for the
first time among the Companions in the city of Madinah. Following the demise of the Prophet, the
Companions used to consult each other over the problems they encountered, and their collective
agreement was accepted by the community. After the Companions, this leadership role passed on to the
next generation, the Successors ( tabi'un ) and then to the second generation of Successors. When these
latter differed on a point, they naturally referred to the views and practices of the Companions and the
Successors. In this way, a fertile ground was created for the development of the theory of ijma' .[6. Cf.
Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , pp. 37-38. ] The essence of ijma` lies in the natural growth of ideas. It begins with the
personal ijtihad  of individual jurists and culminates in the universal acceptance of a particular opinion
over a period of time. Differences of opinion are tolerated until a consensus emerges, and in the process
there is no room for compulsion or the imposition of ideas upon the community.
Ijma' plays a crucial role in the development of Shari'ah . The existing body of fiqh is the product of a
long process of ijtihad  and ijma`. Since ijma` reflects the natural evolution and acceptance of ideas in
the life of the community, the basic notion of ijma' can never be expected to discontinue. The idea that
ijma` came to a halt after the first three generations following the advent of Islam seems to be a by-
product of the phenomenon known as the closure of the gate of ijtihad . Since ijma' originates in ijtihad ,
with the closure of the gate of ijtihad , it was expected that ijma' also came to a close. This is, however,
no more than a superficial equation, as in all probability  ijma' continued to play a role in consolidating
and unifying the law after the supposed termination of  ijtihad .[7. Cf Ahmad Hasan, Early Development , p.160ff.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 158Ijma'  ensures the correct interpretation of the Qur'an, the faithful understanding and transmission of the
Sunnah , and the legitimate use of ijtihad . The question as to whether the law, as contained in the divine
sources, has been properly interpreted is always open to a measure of uncertainty and doubt, especially
in regard to the deduction of new rules by way of analogy and  ijtihad . Only ijma'  can put an end to
doubt, and when it throws its weight behind a ruling, this becomes decisive and infallible. Ijma` has
primarily been regarded as the instrument of conservatism and of preserving the heritage of the past.
This is obvious enough in the sense that whatever is accepted by the entire Muslim community as true
and correct must be accepted as such. However, ijma` is also an instrument of tolerance and of the
evolution of ideas in such directions as may reflect the vision of the scholars to the light of the fresh
educational and cultural achievements for the community. According to one observer, `clearly this
principle (i.e. ijma`) provides Islam with a potential for freedom of movement and a capacity for
evolution. It furnishes a desirable corrective against the dead letter of personal authority. It has proved
itself, at least in the past, an outstanding factor in the adaptability of Islam.'[8. Goldziher, Introduction , p.52.]Ijma` enhances the authority of rules which are of speculative origin. Speculative rules do not carry a
binding force, but once an ijma `is held in their favour, they become definite and binding. Instances can
be cited, for example, where the Companions have, by their ijma' , upheld the ruling of a solitary Hadith.
In such cases, the ruling in question is elevated into a binding rule of law. For example, the prohibition
concerning unlawful conjunction, that is, simultaneous marriage to the close relatives of one's wife, is a
definitive ruling which is based on ijma `, despite the fact that the basis of this ijma` is a solitary Hadith
- namely the Hadith that prohibits simultaneous marriage to the maternal or paternal aunt of one's wife.
Similarly, the grandmother is entitled to a share in inheritance, and this is a qat'i ruling of ijma` which
is based on a solitary Hadith. The Hadith in question is reported by al-Mughirah b. Shu'bah to the effect
that the Prophet assigned to the grandmother the portion of one-sixth. Ijma` has  also played a role in
regard to ahadith  that were not equally known to all the mujtahidun  especially driving the period
preceding the collection and compilation of Hadith. It was through ijma` that some scholars were
informed of the existence of certain ahadith .[9. Muslim, Sahih , p.212, Hadith no. 817; Ibn Majah, Sunan , II, 910, Hadith no. 2724; Abu
Zahrah, Usul , pp.159-161. ]And lastly, ijma` represents authority. Once an ijma is established it tends to become an authority in its
own right, and its roots in the primary sources are gradually weakened or even lost. It then becomes
common practice to quote the law without a reference to the relevant sources. It is partly due to the
significance of ijma` that the incentive to quote the authority tends to weaken. This is according to Shah
Wali Allah, one of the reasons which induced the jurists to recognize ijma` as the third source of the
Shari'ah .[10. Shah Wali Allah, Qurrah , p.40. ]Essential Requirements ( Arkan ) of Ijma `

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 159Whenever an issue arises and attracts the attention of the mujtahidun of the Muslim community at the
time of its incidence, and they reach a unanimous agreement on its ruling, it is implied that the ruling so
agreed upon is the correct and authoritative ruling of the Shari'ah , provided that the following
conditions are fulfilled:
1. That there are a number of mujtahidun  available at the time when the issue is encountered. For
consensus can never exist unless there is a plurality of concurrent opinion. Should there be a
situation where a plurality of mujtahidun  could not be obtained, or when there is only a single
mujtahid  in the community, no ijma' could be expected to materialise.[11. For details on the essential
requirements of ijma' see Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.45ff; Shawkani, Irshad , p.71ff.] 
2. 
3. According to the majority of ulema, unanimity is a prerequisite of ijma`. All the mujtahidun ,
regardless of their locality, race, colour and school or following, must reach a consensus on a
juridical opinion at the time an issue arises. The presence of a dissenting view, even on the part
of a small minority, precludes the possibility of ijma`. If, for example, the mujtahidun  of Mecca
and Madinah, or those of Iraq, or the mujtahidun of the family of the Prophet, or the Sunni
ulema without the agreement of their Shi'i counterparts agree upon a ruling, no ijma' will
materialise.
 
The majority of ulema maintain that lay opinion is not taken into account: in every field of
learning, only the opinion of the learned is relevant to ijma`. Al-Amidi, however, prefers the
minority view, attributed to Abu Bakr al-Baqillani and others, to the effect that ijma' includes
the agreement of both the laymen and the mujtahidun , the reason being that 'ismah , which is the
doctrinal basis of ijma `, is a grace of God bestowed on the whole of the community. It would
therefore be improper to turn the property of the entire community into a privilege of the
mujtahidun . The majority view is, however, based on the analysis that the mujtahidun , in their
capacity as the constituents of ijma`, merely represent the community, and therefore no change
is proposed in the original locus of 'ismah .[12. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 226. Bazdawi, however, distinguishes matters which do not
require specialised knowledge from other matters, and suggests that no discrimination should be made between the layman and the jurists regarding
the essentials of the faith. Ijma` is thus confined to the mujtahidun  only in regard to matters which require expert knowledge. See for details, Bazdawi,
Usul , III, 239.] 
4. 
5. The agreement of the mujtahidun  must be demonstrated by their expressed opinion on a
particular issue. This may be verbal or in writing, such as by giving a fatwa  in either of these
forms, or it may be actual, when, for example, a judge adjudicates the issue in question; or it

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 160may be that every mujtahid  expresses an opinion, and after gathering their views, they are
found to be in agreement. Similarly the mujtahidun  may give their views collectively when, for
example, the mujtahidun  of the Muslim world assemble at the time an issue is encountered and
reach a consensus over its ruling.
 
6. 
7. As a corollary of the second condition above,  ijma' consists of the agreement of all the
mujtahidun , and not a mere majority among them. For so long as a dissenting opinion exists,
there is the possibility that one side is in error, and no ijma' can be envisaged in that situation,
for ijma' is a decisive proof, which must be founded on certainty. However, according to Ibn
Jarir al-Tabari, Abu Bakr al-Razi, one of the two views of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Shah Wali
Allah, ijma' may be concluded by a majority opinion. But al-Asmidi prefers the majority view
on this point, which requires the participation of all mujtahidun .[13. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 235.]8. 
In regard to the rules of fiqh, it is the ijma' of the fuqaha  alone which is taken into account.[14. Shawkani,
Irshad, p.71.] The question naturally arises whether fuqaha belonging to certain factions like the Khawarij,
the Shi'ah, or those who might have been charged with heresy and bid'ah  are qualified to participate in
ijma`. According to the majority view, if a faqih  is known to have actively invited the people to bid'ah ,
he is excluded from ijma' ;
otherwise he is included in the ranks of ahl al-ijma' .[15. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.162.] The Hanafis preclude a
transgressor ( fasiq ) and one who does not act upon his doctrine from being among the ahl al ijma `,
whereas the Shafi'is and some Malikis maintain that a mere transgression is no disqualification.[16. Amidi,
Ihkam , I, 261; `Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p.122.] Some fuqaha  have held that ijma` is concluded only with the
disappearance of the generation ( inqirad al-'asr ), that is, when the mujtahidun  who took part in it have
all passed away. For if any of them is known to be alive, there would still be a possibility that he may
change his view, in which case the ijma` would  collapse. A corollary of this rule is that ijma` is
retrospective, in that it only binds succeeding generations but not its own constituents.[17. Abu Zahrah, Usul ,
p.164.]The majority of jurists, however, maintain that this is not a condition of ijma` and that ijma` not only
binds the next generation but also its own participants, as it would only be reasonable to expect that if
ijma` did not bind its participants, it should not bind anyone else either.[18. Shawkani, Irshad , p.71.] With regard
to the tacit ijma `(for which see below), too, some jurists have held that it is concluded only after the
death of its participants, so that it can be established that none of them have subsequently expressed an
opinion. For when they break their silence they will no longer be regarded as silent participants, and
may even turn a tacit ijma` into an explicit one.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 161The majority of ulema, nevertheless, refuse to place any importance on the `disappearance of the
generation', for in view of the overlapping of generations ( tadakhul al-a'sar ), it is impossible to
distinguish the end of one generation from the beginning of the next. Thus the period of the
Companions cannot be clearly distinguished from that of the Successors, nor can any other period be so
distinguished from its preceding or succeeding generations.[19. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 257; Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , IV, 154.]However, al-Ghazali, to all intents and purposes, has resolved this question by stating that `for the
formation of ijma `, it is enough that agreement should have taken place, even if only for an instant'.[20.
Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 121.]When ijma` fulfills the foregoing requirements, it becomes binding ( wajib ) on everyone. Consequently,
the mujtahidun  of a subsequent age are no longer at liberty to exercise fresh ijtihad  over the same issue.
For once it is concluded, ijma` is not open to amendment or abrogation ( naskh ). The rules of naskh  are
not relevant to ijma` in the sense that ijma` can neither repeal nor be repealed. This is the majority view,
although some jurists have stated that the constituents of ijma` themselves are entitled to repeal their
own ijma' and to enact another one to its place. But once an ijma' is finalised, especially when all of its
constituents have passed away, no further ijma' may be concluded on the same subject. Should there be
a second ijma `on the same point, it will be of no account.[21. Khallaf, ` Ilm, pp. 46-47; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 167.]Proof ( Hujjiyyah ) of Ijma `What proof is there that ijma' is a source of law? The ulema have sought to justify ijma` on  the
authority of the Qur'an, the Sunnah , and reason. We shall presently discuss the ayat and the ahadith  that
have been quoted in support of ijma' . It should be noted at the outset, however, that the ulema have on
the whole maintained the impression that the textual evidence in support of  ijma' does not amount to a
conclusive proof. Having said this, one might add that both al-Ghazali and al-Amidi are of the view that
when compared to the Qur'an, the Sunnah  provides a stronger argument in favour of ijma' .[22. Ghazali,
Mustasfa , I, III, Amidi, Ihkam , I, 219.]1. Ijma' in the Qur'an:The Qur'an (al-Nisa', 4:59) is explicit on the requirement of obedience to God, to His Messenger, and
`those who are in charge of affairs', the  ulu al amr .[23. The ayah  (4:59) provides: 'O you who believe, obey God, and obey the
Messenger, and those charged with authority among you.'] It is also suggested that this ayah lends support to the infallibility
of ijma`. According to al-Fakhr al-Razi, since God has commanded obedience to the ulu al-amr , the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 162judgement of the ulu al-amr must therefore be immune from error. For God cannot command obedience
to anyone who is liable to committing errors.[24. Razi, Tafsir, III, 243.] The word ` amr' in this context is general
and would thus include both secular and religious affairs. The former is discharged by the political
rulers, whereas the latter is discharged by the ulema. According to a commentary attributed to Ibn
'Abbas, ulu al-amr in this ayah  refers to ulema, whereas other commentators have considered it to be a
reference to the umara  , that is, 'rulers and commanders'. The zahir  of the text includes both, and
enjoins obedience to each in their respective spheres. Hence, when the ulu al-amr in juridical matters,
namely the mujtahidun , reach a consensus on a ruling, it must be obeyed.[25. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 47.]Further support for this conclusion can be found elsewhere in sura al-Nisa' (4:83) which once again
confirms the authority of the ulu al-amr next to the Prophet himself.[26. The ayah  (4:83) provides: `If they would only refer
it to the Messenger and those among them who hold command, those of them who investigate matters would have known about it.' (Irving's translation, p. 45.)]The one ayah  which is most frequently quoted in support of ijma' occurs in sura al-Nisa' (4:115), which
is as follows:
And anyone who splits off from the Messenger after the guidance has become clear to
him and follows a way other than that of the believers, We shall leave him in the path
he has chosen, and land him in Hell. What an evil refuge!
The commentators observe that `the way of the believers' in this ayah  refers to their 'agreement and the
way that they have chosen', in other words, to their consensus. Adherence to the way of the community
is thus binding, while departure from it is forbidden. Departing from the believers' way has been
approximated to disobeying the Prophet, both of which are forbidden. There are several points that the
commentators have highlighted concerning this ayah . However, before elaborating further, a brief
discussion of the other Qur'anic passages which are quoted in support of consensus would be useful.
The Qur'an is expressive of the dignified status that God has bestowed on the Muslim community. Thus
we read in sura Al-`Imran (3:109): `You are the best community that has been raised for mankind. You
enjoin right and forbid evil and you believe in God.' This ayah  attests to some of the outstanding merits
of the Muslim community. It is thus argued that had the community been capable of agreeing on an
error, the Qur'an would not have praised it in such terms. It is further noted that the contents of this
ayah  give some indication as to the meaning of the phrase `the believers' way'.
On the same theme, we read in sura al-Baqarah (2:143): `Thus We have made you a middle nation
[ummatan wasatan ], that you may be witnesses over mankind.' Literally, wasat  means `middle',
implying justice and balance, qualities which merit recognition of the agreed decision of the community

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 163and the rectitude of its way. Furthermore, it is by virtue of uprightness that God has bestowed upon the
Muslim community the merit of being a `witness over mankind'.[27. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 211.]In yet another reference to the ummah , the Qur'an proclaims in sura al-A'raf (7:181): `And of those We
created are a nation who direct others with truth and dispense justice on its basis.' There are three other
ayat which need to be quoted. These are:
Al-'Imran (3:102): `Cling firmly together to God's rope and do not separate.'
This ayah  obviously forbids separation ( tafarruq ). Since opposition to the  ijma' is a form of tafarruq , it
is therefore prohibited.[28. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 217; Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 111.]Al-Shura (42:10): 'And in whatever you differ, the judgment remains with God', 'which
implicitly approves that in which the community is in agreement.'[29. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 111.]Al-Nisa' (4:59):  `Then if you dispute over something, refer it to God and the
Messenger.'
By implication (i.e., divergent implication - mafhum al-mukhalafah ), this ayah  too upholds the authority
of all that is agreed upon by the community.[30. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 111.]Having quoted all the foregoing ayat, al-Ghazali observes that 'all of these are apparent indications
(zawahir ) none of which amounts to a clear  nass on the subject of ijma `.' Al-Ghazali adds that of all
these, the ayah  at 4:115 is closest to the point. For it renders adherence to the `believers' way' an
obligation. Al-Shafi`i has also quoted it, and has drawn the conclusion that this ayah  provides a clear
authority for ijma `. According to him, following a way other than that of the believers is haram, and
following the believers' way is wajib .[31. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 111.] But despite this, al-Ghazali explains that the
main theme of this ayah  is a warning against disobedience to the Prophet and hostility against the
believers. It requires the believers to give the Prophet active support and defend him against enemies. It
is not enough for a believer merely to avoid causing hardship ( mashaqqa ) to the Prophet; he must
actively help him and obey all his commands and prohibitions. This is the main theme of the ayah . The
Prophet himself has not given it a specific interpretation to warrant a departure from its manifest ( zahir )
meaning. The Prophet, in other words, has not made any reference to ijma` in this context From this

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 164analysis, it would appear that al-Ghazali does not agree with the conclusion that al-Shafi'i has drawn
from this ayah .
Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's interpretation of the same ayah  is broadly in line with what al-Ghazali had to
say. There is no indication in al-Suyuti's Tafsir al-Jalalayn to the effect that this ayah provides an
explicit authority for ijma' .[32. Suyuti, Tafsir , I, 87.]Following a path other than that of the believers', according to both al-Suyuti and al-Shawkani, means
abandoning Islam. Al-Shawkani adds: 'A number of ulema have drawn the conclusion that this ayah
provides the authority for  ijma' . But this is an unwarranted conclusion, as following a way other than
that of the believers means unbelief, that is, renouncing Islam in favour of another religion.' Al-
Shawkani further suggests that the occasion of revelation ( sha'n al-nuzul ) of this ayah  relates to the
context of apostasy. Specifically, it is reported that one Tu`mah b. Ubayraq had accused a Jew of a theft
which Tu'mah had committed himself. As a result of the revelation of this ayah , the Jew was cleared of
the charge but Tu`mah himself renounced Islam and fled to Mecca.[33. Shawkani, Fath al-Qadir , I, 515; idem., Irshad , p.
75. For a good summary of Shawkani's views on the subject see Sadr, ijma' , pp. 30-40.]Muhammad 'Abduh and his disciple, Rashid Rida have observed that the ayah under discussion was
revealed concerning the 'way of the believers' during the lifetime of the Prophet, and its application
must be confined to that period. For hostility toward the Prophet was only possible when he was alive.
`Abduh further remarks that to quote this
ayah  in support of ijma` leads to irrational conclusions, for it would amount to drawing a parallel
between those who are threatened with the punishment of Hell and a mujtahid  who differs with the
opinion of others. A  mujtahid , even when he takes an exception to the prevalent opinion, or to the path
followed by other mujtahidun , is still a Muslim, and even merits a reward for his efforts. 'Abduh
concludes that the sha'n al-nuzul of this ayah does not lend support to the conclusion that al-Shafi'i has
drawn from it.[34. Rashid Rida, Tafsir al-Manar , V, 201. For a similar view see Sadr, Ijma' , p.40.]It is further suggested that the threat in the ayah  under discussion is primarily concerned with the first
part of the ayah , namely, disobeying the Prophet, and not necessarily with the second. Hence
divergence from the believers' way is lawful in the absence of opposition to the Prophet. The validity of
this critique is, however, disputed, as the ayah  itself does not distinguish between the two parts as such,
and therefore the threat applies equally to both.[35 Amidi, Ihkam , I, 205.]Al-Amidi discusses the Qur'anic ayat concerning ijma' , and concludes that they may give rise to a
probability ( zann ) but they do not impart positive knowledge. If we assume that ijma` is a decisive
proof, then establishing its authority on the basis of speculative evidence is not enough. Speculative

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 165evidence would suffice only if ijma' were deemed to be a speculative doctrine, which is not the case.[36
Amidi, Ihkam , I, 218.]2. The Sunnah on Ijma `The Hadith which is most frequently quoted in support of ijma' reads:
`My community shall never agree on an error.'[37. Ibn Majah, Sunan , II, 1303. Hadith no. 3950. This and a number of other ahadith  on
ijma' have been quoted by both Ghazali and Amidi as shown in footnote 41 below.]  The last word in this Hadith, namely al-dalalah,
is rendered in some reports as al-khata .' The jurists have used the two words interchangeably, but in the
classical Hadith collections this Hadith has been recorded with the word al-dalalah .[38. Cf. Ahmad Hasan,
Docrtrine , p.60.]   Al-Ghazali has pointed out that this Hadith is not mutawatir , and as such, it is not an
absolute authority like the Qur'an. The Qur'an on the other hand is mutawatir but contains no nass on
ijma`. Having said this, however, al-Ghazali adds that a number of prominent Companions have
reported ahadith  from the Prophet, which although different in their wording, are all in consonance on
the theme of the infallibility of the community and its immunity from error.[39. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 111.]Leading figures among the Companions such as 'Umar b. al-Khattab, `Abdullah b. Mas'ud, Anas b.
Malik. `Abdullah b. Umar, Abu Said al-Khudri, Abu Hurayrah, Hudhayfah and others have reported
ahadith  which include the following:
1. My community shall never agree upon an error ( al-khata' ):
2. God will not let my community agree upon an error:
3. I beseeched Almighty God not to bring my community to the point of agreeing on
dalalah  and He granted me this:
4. Those who seek the joy of residing in Paradise will follow the community. For Satan
can chase an individual but he stands farther away from two people:

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 1665. The hand of God is with the community and (its safety) is not endangered by isolated
oppositions:
6. Whoever leaves the community or separates himself from it by the length of a span
is breaking his bond with Islam:
7. A group of my ummah  shall continue to remain on the right path. They will be the
dominant force and will not be harmed by the opposition of opponents:
8. Whoever separates himself from the community and dies, dies the death of ignorance
(jahiliyyah ):
9. And finally, the well-known saying of 'Abdullah b. Mas'ud which is as follows:
'Whatever the Muslims deem to be good is good in the eyes of God.[40. Amidi considers this to be
a Hadith whose chain of narration goes back to the Prophet (see his Ihkam , I, 214). Ahmad Hasan points out that Muhammad b. Hasan al-
Shaybani initially reported this as a Hadith, but later it was attributed to Ibn Mas'ud (see his Doctrine , p. 37).]Having quoted these (and other) ahadith , both al-Ghazali and al-Amidi observe that their main theme
and purport has not been opposed by the Companions, the Successors and others throughout the ages,
and that everyone has agreed on their broad outline. The ulema have continued to rely on them in their
exposition of the general and detailed rules of the Shari'ah . In answer to the point that all these are
solitary ( ahad ) reports which do not amount to a definitive proof, the same authors observe that the
main purport of these ahadith  nevertheless conveys positive knowledge, and that the infallibility of the
ummah  is sustained by their collective weight [41. Ghazali, Mustasfa ; I, 111; Amidi, Ihkam , I, 220-221.] The point may be
illustrated by saying that we know the courage of `Ali, the generosity of Hatim, the erudition of al-
Shafi'i in fiqh, and the esteem in which the Prophet held his Companions, despite the absence of
Mutawatir reports on these subjects. Although the foregoing ahadith  are all Ahad  and could be
subjected to doubt if taken individually, their collective import may, nevertheless, not be denied.[42.
Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 112.]As to the question whether 'dalalah' and `khata' ', in these ahadith (especially in the first four) could
mean disbelief ( kufr) and heresy ( bid'ah ) with the view that the Prophet might have meant that his

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 167community shall not fall into disbelief, it is observed that khata' is general and could include kufr but
that dalalah  does not, for dalalah  only means an error or erroneous conduct.[43. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 112: We find in
the Qur'an, for example, in an address to the Prophet Muhammad: And He found then wondering [ dallan ] and gave thee guidance (al-Duha, 93:7). In another place
the Qur'an relates of Moses the following words: `He said: I did it then [i.e. slayed the Egyptian] when I was in error' (al-Shu'ara', 26:20). In both these instances
dalal  does not imply disbelief. Similarly the Arabic expression dalla fulan `an al-tariq (so-and-so lost his way) confirms the same meaning of dalal .] If
dalalah  meant disbelief, then the ahadith  under discussion would fail to provide an authority for the
infallibility of the ummah , but if it meant an error only, then they could provide such authority.[44. Ghazali,
Mustasfa , I, 112: We find in the Qur'an, for example, in an address to the Prophet Muhammad: And He found then wondering [ dallan ] and gave thee guidance (al-
Duha, 93:7). In another place the Qur'an relates of Moses the following words: `He said: I did it then [i.e. slayed the Egyptian] when I was in error' (al-Shu'ara',
26:20). In both these instances dalal  does not imply disbelief. Similarly the Arabic expression dalla fulan `an al-tariq (so-and-so lost his way) confirms the same
meaning of dalal .]It is further observed that the article 'la' in the Hadith under discussion could either imply negation
(nafy) or prohibition ( nahy ). If the latter, it would simply prohibit the people from deviation, and as
such the Hadith could not sustain the notion of infallibility for the ummah.[45 Sadr Ijma' , p. 43: An example of the ' la of
prohibition' is the Qur'anic prohibition concerning adultery which reads la taqrabu al-zina (do not approach zina). With a  la of prohibition the Hadith would simply
instruct the community not to agree upon an error.] According to another observer, the manifest ( zahir ) meaning of the
Hadith is that the ummah  abstains from a collective agreement on an error. The Hadith, in other words,
precludes a general agreement on an error, but not the error itself. These are some of the doubts which
have been expressed concerning the precise meaning of the Hadith. They may or may not be correct,
but so long as the Hadith is open to such doubts, it cannot provide a decisive proof ( dalil qat'i ) for
ijma' .[46. Sadr. Ijma`, 43.] Muhammad `Abduh has observed that the Hadith in question does not speak of
ijma` at all, nor does it sustain the notion of infallibility for the community. It is an exaggerated claim to
read ijma' into this Hadith regardless of whether reference is made to the agreement of the jurists or to
that of the community at large.[47. Rida, Tafsir al-Manar , V, 205.]It is further suggested that some of the foregoing ahadith  (nos. 4, 5 and 6 in particular) simply
encourage fraternity and love among the members of the community, and, as such, do not en-visage the
notion of ijma' as a source of law. As for our Hadith number seven, although al-Ghazali quotes it, it is
not relevant to ijma`, as it obviously means that a group of the ummah  shall remain on the right path,
not the ummah  as a whole. The Shi'ah Imamiyyah have quoted this Hadith in support of their doctrine
of the ijma' of ahl al-bayt , which refers to the members of the family of the Prophet.[48. Sadr, Ijma' , pp. 44-45.]The word ` ummah' (or jama'ah ) in the foregoing ahadith  means, according to one view, the
overwhelming majority of Muslims. This view is supported in a number of statements from the
Companions. According to another view, jama'ah  refers to the scholars of the community only. The
masses, it is argued, look up to the scholars from whom they acquire knowledge of law and religion,
and it is the latter whose consensus is contemplated in the relevant ahadith . According to yet another
opinion, ummah  (and jama'ah ) refers only to the Companions, who are the founding fathers of the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 168Muslim community. According to this interpretation, ummah  and jama'ah  in all the foregoing ahadith
refer to the Companions only.[49. Cf. Hasan, Doctrine , p.59.]And finally, ummah  and jama`ah refer to the whole of the Muslim community and not to a particular
section thereof. The grace of 'ismah , according to this view, is endowed on the whole of the community
without any reservation or specification. Thus is the view of al-Shafi'i, who wrote in his Risalah : 'And
we know that the people at large cannot agree on an error or on what may contradict the Sunnah  of the
Prophet.[50. Shafi'i's Risalah  (trans. Khadduri), p.285. ]Having discussed the ahadith  relating to ijma' , Ahmad Hasan observes that they are inconclusive. All of
them emphasise unity and integration. Some of them are predictive and others circumstantial: They may
mean ijma`, or something else.' Hence the argument that they provide the authority for ijma' is
'definitely subjective'. The same author elaborates that:
a. There was no idea of ijma` as a doctrine of jurisprudence in the early period;
 
b. 
c. The jurists could not determine a definite meaning for 'ummah' or Jama'ah ; and
 
d. 
e. Ahadith  which convey a general meaning should not be restricted to a particular point of
view.[51. Hasan, Doctrine , pp.59-60.]f. 
Notwithstanding the doubts and uncertainties in the nusus , the majority of ulema have concluded that
the consensus of all the mujtahidun  on a particular ruling is a sure indication that the word of truth has
prevailed over their differences; that it is due to the strength of that truth that they have reached a
consensus. This rational argument in support of ijma` has  been further advanced to the effect that
consensus upon a shar'i  ruling is bound to be founded on sound ijtihad . In exercising ijtihad , the
mujtahid  is normally guided by certain rules and guidelines. Ijtihad  often consists of an interpretation of
the nass, or of a rational extension of its ruling. Even in the absence of a nass, ijtihad  still observes both
the letter and spirit of the sources which the mujtahid  has mastered through his general knowledge.
Since ijtihad  is founded on sound authority in the first place, the unanimous agreement of all the
mujtahidun  on a particular ruling indicates that there is clear authority in the Shari'ah  to sustain their
consensus. In the event of this authority being weak or speculative, we can only expect disagreement
(ikhtilaf ), which would automatically preclude consensus. Ijma' in other words, accounts for its own
authority.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 169Feasibility of Ijma'A number of ulema, including the Mu'tazili leader Abraham al-Nazism and some Shi'i ulema, have held
that ijma` in the way defined by the jumhur  ulema is not feasible. To ascertain the consensus of the
ulema on any matter which is not obvious is just as impossible as their unanimity at any given moment
on what they utter and what they eat.[52. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 79; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.48. ] It may be possible to ascertain the
broad outline of an agreement among the mujtahidun  on a particular matter, but to say that their
consensus could be ascertained in such a way- as to impart positive knowledge is not feasible. Since the
mujtahidun  would normally be located in distant places, cities and continents, access to all of them and
obtaining their views is beyond the bounds of practicality. Difficulties are also encountered in
distinguishing a mujtahid  from a non- mujtahid . Since it is the mujtahidun  whose consensus constitutes
ijma`, one must be able to identify them with certainty. Apart from the absence of clear criteria
concerning the attributes of a mujtahid , there are some among them who have not achieved fame. Even
granting that they could be known and numbered, there is still no guarantee to ensure that the mujtahid
who gives an opinion will not change it before an ijma` is reached. So long as this is possible, no ijma`
can be realised, for it is a condition of ijma'  that all the mujtahidun  be simultaneously in agreement.[53.
Khallaf, `Ilm, p.49.] It is mainly due to these reasons that al-Shafi'i confines the occurrence of ijma` to the
obligatory duties alone as he considers that on matters other than these, ijma'  is not a realistic
proposition at all.[54. Shafi'i, Risalah , p.205; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.158.]It is due partly to their concern over the feasibility of ijma` that according to the Zahiris and Imam
Ahmad ibn Hanbal ijma' refers to the consensus of the Companions alone. Imam Malik on the other
hand confines ijma` to the people of Madinah, and the Shi'ah Imamiyyah recognise only the agreement
of the members of the Prophet's family ( ahl al-bayt ). In Shi'i jurisprudence,  ijma ` is inextricably linked
with the Sunnah . For the agreement of the ahl al-bayt (that is, their recognised Imams), automatically
becomes an integral part of the Sunnah . `In the Shi'ite view', as Mutahhari explains, `consensus goes
back to the Sunnah  of the Prophet [...]. Consensus is not genuinely binding in its own right, rather it is
binding inasmuch as it is a means of discovering the Sunnah .[55. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 230. Mutahhari, Jurisprudence , p.20.] In
support of their argument that ijma is confined to the ahl al-bayt , the Shi'i ulema have referred to the
Qur'an (al-Ahzab 33:33): `God wishes to cleanse you, the people of the house [of the Prophet], of
impurities.' The Shi'i doctrine also relies on the Hadith in which the Prophet is reported to have said, `I
am leaving among you two weighty things, which, if you hold by them, you will not go astray: The
Book of God, and my family.'
The reference in this Hadith, according to its Shi'i interpreters, is to 'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn.
The Sunnis have maintained, however, that the ayah  in sura al-Ahzab was revealed regarding the wives
of the Prophet and that the context in which it was revealed is different. Similarly, while quoting the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 170foregoing Hadith, al-Amidi observes: `doubtlessly the ahl al-bayt enjoy a dignified status, but dignity
and descent are not necessarily the criteria of one's ability to carry out ijtihad .[56. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 246ff.]There is yet another argument to suggest that ijma' is neither possible nor, in fact, necessary. Since
ijma` is founded on ijtihad , the mujtahid  must rely on an indication ( dalil) in the sources which is either
decisive ( qat'i) or speculative ( zanni ). If the former is the case, the community is bound to know of it,
for a decisive indication in the nusus  could not remain hidden from the entire community. Hence there
would be no need for ijma` to substantiate the nass or to make it known to the people. Furthermore,
when there is qat'i indication, then that itself is the authority, in which case ijma' would be redundant.[57.
Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 49.] Ijma`, in other words, can add nothing to the authority of a decisive nass. But if the
indication in the nass happens to be speculative, then once again there will be no case for ijma' : a
speculative indication can only give rise to ikhtilaf , not ijma' .[58. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p 49; Shawkani, Irshad , p.79.]According to a report, `Abdullah b. Ahmad b. Hanbal quoted his father to have said: It is no more than
a lie for any man to claim the existence of ijma`. Whoever claims ijma` is telling a lie.[59. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 198;
Shawkani, Irshad , p.73. ] The jumhur  ulema, however, maintain that ijma' is possible and has occurred in the
past, adding that those who deny it are only casting doubt on the possibility of something which has
occurred. Note for example the ijma' of the Companions on the exclusion of the son's son from
inheritance, when there is a son; and their ijma' on the rule that land in the conquered territories may not
be distributed to the conquerors; or their ruling that consanguine brothers are counted as full brothers in
the absence of the latter.[60. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.159.] This last rule is based on a Hadith in which the Prophet
counted them both as brothers without distinguishing the one from the other.[61. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.165.] The
ijma' that is recorded on these issues became standard practice during the period of the first four
caliphs, who often consulted the Companions and announced their collective decisions in public.[62. Hasan,
Doctrine , p.164.]`Abd al-Wahhab Khallaf is of the view that an ijma` in accordance with its classical definition is not
feasible in modern times. Khallaf adds that it is unlikely that ijma` could be effectively utilised if it is
left to Muslim individuals and communities without there being a measure of government intervention.
But ijma' could be feasible if it were to be facilitated by the ruling authorities. The government in every
Muslim country could, for example, specify certain conditions for attainment to the rank of mujtahid ,
and make this contingent upon obtaining a recognised certificate. This world enable every government
to identify the mujtahidun  and to verify their views when the occasion so required When the views of
all the mujtahidun  throughout the Islamic lands concur upon a ruling concerning an issue, this becomes
ijma`, and the ruling so arrived at becomes a binding hukm  of the Shari'ah  upon all the Muslims of the
world.[63. Khallaf, `Ilm, pp. 49-50. ]The question is once again asked whether the classical definition of ijma' has ever been fulfilled at any
period following the demise of the Prophet. Khallaf answers this question in the negative, although

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 171some ulema maintain that the ijma ' of the Companions did fulfill these requirements. Khallaf observes
that anyone who scrutinises events during the period of the companions will note that their ijma'
consisted of the agreement of the learned among them who were present at the time when an issue was
deliberated, and the ruling which followed was a collective decision of the shura . When the caliph Abu
Bakr could not find the necessary guidance for settling a dispute in the Qur'an or the Sunnah , he would
convene the community leaders for consultation, and if they agreed on an opinion, he would act upon it.
The community leaders so convened did not include everyone; many were, in fact, on duty in Mecca,
Syria, the Yemen, etc. There is nothing in the reports to suggest that Abu Bakr postponed the settlement
of disputes until a time when all the mujtahidun  of the age in different cities reached an agreement. He
would instead act on the collective decision of those who were present. The practice of 'Umar b. al-
Khattab corresponded with that of his predecessor, and this is what the fuqaha  have referred to as ijma`.
This form of  ijma' was only practiced during the period of the Companions, and intermittently under the
Umayyads in al-Andalus when in the second Islamic century they set up a council of ulema for
consultation in legislative affairs ( tashri'  ). References are found, in the works of some ulema of the
Andalus, to the effect that so-and-so was the `learned member' of the council.
With the exception of these periods in the history of Islam, no collective ijma' is known to have taken
place on any medical matter. The mujtahidun  were engaged in their juridical activities as individuals,
whose views either agreed or disagreed with those of the other mujtahidun . The most that a particular
mujtahid  was able to say on any particular matter was that `no disagreement is known to exist on the
hukm  of this or that incident'.[64. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.50. ]Types of Ijma  `From the viewpoint of the manner of its occurrence, ijma` is  divided into two types:
a. Explicit  ijma ` (al-ijma' al-sarih ) in which every mujtahid  expresses his opinion either verbally
or by an action; and
 
b. 
c. Tacit ijma`(al-ijma `al-sukuti ) whereby some of the mujtahidun  of a particular age give an
expressed opinion concerning an incident while the rest remain silent.
d. 
According to the jumhur  ulema, explicit ijma' is definitive and binding. Tacit ijma' is a presumptive
ijma' which only creates a probability ( zann ) but does not preclude the possibility of fresh ijtihad  on the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 172same issue. Since tacit ijma` does not imply the definite agreement of all its participants, the ulema
have differed over its authority as a proof. The majority of ulema, including al-Shafi'i, have held that it
is not a proof and that it does not amount to more than the view of some individual mujtahidun . But the
Hanafis have considered tacit ijma` to be a proof provided it is established that the mujtahid who has
remained silent had known of the opinion of other mujtahidun  but then, having had ample time to
investigate and to express an opinion, still chose to remain silent. If it is not known that the silence was
due to fear or taqiyyah  (hiding one's true opinion), or wariness of inviting disfavour and ridicule, then
the silence of a mujtahid  on an occasion where he ought to express an opinion when there was nothing
to stop him from doing so would be considered tantamount to agreeing with the existing opinion.[65.
Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 51; Shawkani, Irshad , p.72.]The proponents of tacit  ijma' have further pointed out that explicit agreement or open speech by all the
mujtahidun  concerning an issue is neither customary nor possible. In every age, it is the usual practice
that the leading ulema give an opinion which is often accepted by others. Suppose that the entire
ummah  gathered in one place and shouted all at once saying that, 'we agree on such-and-such'. Even if
this were possible, it would still not impart positive knowledge. For some of them might have remained
silent due to fear, uncertainty, or taqiyyah .[66. Shawkani, Irshad , p.72, Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.163.]Further, the Hanafis draw a distinction between the `concession' ( rukhsah ) and 'strict rule' ( azimah ), and
consider tacit ijma' to be valid only with regard to the former. In order to establish a strict role, ijma`
must be definitely stated or expressed by an act. The Hanafis are alone in validating tacit ijma`. The
Zahiris refuse it altogether, while some
Shafi'is like al-Juwayni, al-Ghazali and al-Amidi allow a with certain reservations. 'It is ijma`, al-
Ghazali tells us, 'provided that the tacit agreement is accompanied by indications of approval on the part
of those who are silent.' [67. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 121; Encyclopedia of Islam (New Edition) III, 1024.]The majority opinion on this matter is considered to be preferable. For the silence of a mujtahid  could
be due to a variety of factors, and it would be arbitrary to lump them all together and say that silence
definitely indicates consent. But despite the controversy it has aroused, tacit ijma' is by no means an
exceptional case. On the contrary, it is suggested that most of what is known by the name of  ijma' falls
under this category.[68. Khallaf,  Ilm, p.51.]The next topic that needs to be taken up in this context is the 'Madinese consensus', or ijma' ahl al-
Madinah.
According to the Maliki ulema, since Madinah was the centre of Islamic teaching, the 'abode of hijrah'
(dar al-hijrah ) and the place where most of the Companions resided, the consensus of its people is
bound to command high authority. Although the majority of ulema have held that the Madinese ijma`is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 173not a proof on its own, Imam Malik held that it is. There is some disagreement among the disciples of
Malik as to the interpretation of the views of their Imam. Some of these disciples have observed that
Imam Malik had only meant that the ijma` of  the people of Madinah is a proof 'from the viewpoint of
narration and factual reporting' ( min jihah al-naql wa'l-riwayah ) as they were closest to the sources of
the Shari'ah . Other Maliki jurists have held that Malik only meant the Madinese ijma' to be preferable
but not exclusive. There are still others who say that Malik had in mind the ijma' of  the Companions
alone. The proponents of the Madinese
ijma`                                                                                                      sought to substantiate their views
with ahadith  which include the following: 'Madinah is sacred, and throws out its dross as fire casts out
the dross of metal,' and 'Islam will cling to Madinah as a serpent clings to its hole.' [69. Bukhari, Sahih  (Istanbul
edn.), II, 221; Muslim, Sahih , p.17, Hadith no.38; Amidi, Ihkam , I, 243. Ibn Hazm discusses ijma' ahl al -Madinah in some length, but cites none of the ahadith that
are quoted by Amidi and others. He merely points out that some of the ahadith  which are quoted in support of the Maliki doctrine are authentic ( sahih ), while
others are mere fabrications ( makdhub/ mawdu `) reported by one 'Muhammad ibn Hasan ibn Zabalah' ( Ihkam  IV, 154-155)]The majority of jurists, however, maintain that these ahadith  merely speak of the dignity of Madinah
and its people. Even if the ahadith  are taken to rule out the presence of impurity in Madinah, they do
not mean that the rest of the ummah  is impure, and even less that the Madinese  ijma' alone is
authoritative. Had the sacred character of a place been a valid criterion, then one might say that the
consensus of the people of Mecca would command even greater authority, as Mecca is the most
virtuous of cities ( afdal al-bilad ) according to the  nass of the Qur'an. Furthermore, knowledge and
competence in ijtihad  are not confined to any particular place. This is the purport of the Hadith in which
the Prophet said: 'My Companions are like stars. Whomsoever of them that you follow will guide you
to the right path.'
This Hadith pays no attention whatsoever to the place where a Companion might have resided.[70. Amidi,
Ihkam , I, 243ff. ] To this analysis, Ibn Hazm adds the point that there were, as we learn from the Qur'an,
profligates and transgressors ( fussaq wa'l-munafiqun ) in Madinah just like other cities. The
Companions were knowledgeable in the teachings of the Prophet wherever they were, within or outside
Madinah, and staying in Madinah by itself did not necessarily enhance their standing in respect of
knowledge, or the ability to carry out ijtihad .[71. Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , IV, 155.]Basis ( Sanad ) of Ijma `According to the majority if ulema, ijma` must be founded in a textual authority or in ijtihad . Al-Amidi
points out that it is unlikely that the ummah  might reach unanimity over something that has no
foundation in the sources.[72. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 261.] The ulema are in agreement that ijma `may be based on the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 174Qur'an or the Sunnah . There is, however, disagreement as to whether ijma' can be based on a ruling in
the secondary proofs such as qiyas  or maslahah .
There are three views on this point, the first of which is that ijma` may  not be founded on qiyas , for the
simple reason that qiyas  itself is subject to a variety of doubts. Since the authority of qiyas  as a proof is
not a subject on which the ulema are in agreement, how then could ijma` be founded on it? It is further
noted that the Companions did not reach a consensus on anything without the authority of the Qur'an or
the Sunnah . In all cases in which the Companion are known to have reached a consensus, at the root of
it there has been some authority in the primary sources.[73. Abu Zahrah, Usul, pp.165-166.]The second view is that qiyas  in all of its varieties may form the basis of consensus. For qiyas  itself
consists of an analogy to the nass. Relying on qiyas  is therefore equivalent to relying on the  nass , and
when ijma` is based on a qiyas , it relies not on the personal views of the mujtahidun  but on the nass of
the Shari'ah .
The third view on this subject is that when the effective cause (` illah) of qiyas is clearly stated in the
nass, or when the 'illah is indisputably obvious, then qiyas  may validly form the bases of ijma'. But
when the 'illah of qiyas  is hidden and no clear indication to it can be found in the nusus , then it cannot
form a sound foundation for ijma' . Abu Zahrah considers this to be a sound opinion: when the ` illah of
qiyas  is indicated in the  nusus , reliance on qiyas  is tantamount to relying on the  nass itself.[74. Abu Zahrah,
Usul , pp.165-166.]Instances could be cited of ijma` which is founded upon analogy. To give an example, a father is
entitled to guardianship over the person and property of his minor child. By ijma' this right is also
established for the grandfather regarding his minor grandchild. This ruling of ijma` is founded upon an
analogy between the father and grandfather. A similar example is given regarding the assignment of
punishment for wine drinking ( shurb ). This penalty is fixed at eighty lashes, and an ijma' has been
claimed in its support. When the Companions were deliberating the issue, `Ali b. Abi Talib drew an
analogy between shurb and slanderous accusation ( qadhf ). Since shurb  can lead to qadhf , the prescribed
penalty for the latter was, by analogy, assigned to the former. The alleged ijma` on  this point has,
however, been disputed in view of the fact that 'Umar b. al-Khattab determined the hadd  of shurb  at
forty lashes, a position which has been adopted by Ahmad b. Hanbal. To claim an ijma' on this point is
therefore unwarranted.[75 Abu Zahrah, Usul, pp.166, 193.]Transmission of Ijma `

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 175The issue to be examined here is the nature of the evidence by which the fact that a particular question
has been determined by ijma' may be proved. From this perspective, ijma'  is divided into two types,
namely 'acquired' ( muhassal ) and `transmitted' ( manqul ). The first is concluded with the direct
participation of the mujtahid  without the mediation of reporters or transmitters. The mujtahid  thus gains
direct knowledge of the opinions of other mujtahidun when they all reach a consensus on a ruling. But
transmuted ijma' is established by means of reports which may either be solitary ( ahad ) or conclusive
(mutawatir ). In the case of transmission by tawatur  there is no problem of proof, and ijma' which is
transmitted by tawatur  is proven in the same way as acquired ijma' . But there is disagreement regarding
ijma' which is transmitted by way of solitary reports. Al-Ghazali points out that a solitary report is not
sufficient to prove ijma' , although some fuqaha  have held otherwise. The reason is that ijma' is a
decisive proof whereas an ahad report amounts to no more than speculative evidence; thus, it cannot
establish ijma'  .[76. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 127; Sadr, Ijma' , pp. 97-98.]Al-Amidi explains that a number of the ulema of the Shafi'i, Hanafi and Hanbali schools validate the
proof of ijma' by means of solitary reports whereas another group of Hanafi and Shafi'i ulema do not.
All have nevertheless agreed that anything which is proved by means of a solitary report is speculative
of proof ( thubut ) even if definitive in respect of content ( matn ).[77. Amidi, Ihkam , I, 281. ]Proof by means of tawatur  can only be claimed for the ijma` of the Companions; no other ijma'  is
known to have been transmitted by  tawatur . This is the main reason why the fuqaha have differed in
their views concerning any ijma` other than that of the Companions. A large number of the ulema of
usul have maintained that transmission through solitary reports amounts to speculative evidence only.
When ijma' is based on such evidence, it loses its value and the  hukm for which ijma` is claimed must
be referred back to the source from which it was derived in the first place.[78. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp.167-68.]Reform ProposalsThe modern critics of ijma' consider that ijma' according to its classical definition fails to relate to the
search for finding solutions to the problems of the community in modern times. Ijma` is hence
retrospective and too slow a process to accommodate the problems of social change. These and other
considerations concerning the relevance of ijma` to social realities have prompted a response from
modern scholars. We have already discussed the view of `Abd al-Wahhab Khallaf in regard to the
feasibility of ijma`. Khallaf, however, was not the first to criticise  ijma' .
An early- critique of ijma' was advanced by Shah Wali Allah Dihlawi (d. 1176/1762), who tried to
bring ijma` closer to reality and came out in support of `relativity' in the concept of ijma`. Dihlawi

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 176overruled the notion of universal consensus in favour of relative  ijma `. Dihlawi is also critical of the
interpretation that is given to the ahadith  concerning ijma`. He argues that the Hadith, `My community
shall never agree upon an error' did not envisage ijma` at all. Hence the correct meaning of this Hadith
may be determined in the light of another Hadith which provides that `a section of my community will
continue to remain on the right path [...].' Ijma` in other words does not mean a universal agreement but
only the consensus of a limited number of mujtahidun . With regard to the other ahadith  that are quoted
in support of ijma`, Dihlawi maintains that the two principal aims of these ahadith are the political unity
of the ummah , and the integrity of the Shari'ah . The same author maintains that ijma' can be justified on
the bases of all such ahadith  that protect the unity and integrity of the community. But he adds that
ijma` has never been meant to consist of the universal agreement of every member of the community
(or of every learned member of the community for that matter), as this is plainly impossible to achieve.
It has neither happened in the past nor could it conceivably happen in the future. Ijma' , according to
Shah Wali Allah, is the consensus of the ulema and men of authority in different towns and localities. In
this sense, ijma' can be held anywhere at any time. The  ijma' of the Companions during the caliphate of
Umar b. al-Khattab, and the ijma` that was concluded in Mecca and Madinah under the pious caliphs,
are all examples of ijma` in its relative sense.[79. Shah Wali Allah, Izalah , I, 266.]Muhammad Iqbal is primarily concerned with the question of how to utilise the potentials of ijma` in
the process of modern statutory legislation. He considers it an important doctrine, but one which has
remained largely theoretical. `It is strange,' Iqbal writes, that this important notion 'rarely assumed the
form of a permanent institution'. He then suggests that the transfer of the power of ijtihad  `from
individual representatives of schools to a Muslim legislative assembly [...] is the only possible form
ijma` can take in modern times'.[80. Iqbal, Reconstruction , pp. 173, 174.] In such an assembly, the ulema should play a
vital part, but it must also include in its ranks laymen who happen to possess a keen insight into affairs.
Furthermore Iqbal draws a distinction between the two functions of ijma' , namely:
Discovering the law and implementing the law. The former function is related to the
question of facts and the latter relates to the question of law. In the former case, as for
instance, when the question arose whether the two small suras known as
'Mu'awwazatain ' formed part of the Qur'an or not, and the Companions unanimously
decided that they did, we are bound by their decision, obviously because the
Companions alone were in a position to know the fact. In the latter case, the question is
one of interpretation only, and I venture to think, on the authority of Karkhi, that later
generations are not bound by the decisions of the Companions. [81. Iqbal, Reconstruction , p.175.
Iqbal goes on to quote the Hanafi jurist Abu'l-Hasan al-Karkhi as saying: 'The Sunnah  of the companions is binding in matters which
cannot be cleared up by qiyas , but it is not so in matters which can be established by qiyas '. (No specific reference is given to al-Karkhi's
work.)]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 177It is thus clear that Iqbal retains the binding character of  ijma' only insofar as it relates to points of fact,
but not with regard to ijma' that is based on juridical ijtihad . This distinction between the factual and
juridical ijma' will presumably not apply to the ijma` that Iqbal has proposed: the collective decisions of
the legislative assembly will naturally be binding on points of law.
Iqbal's proposed reform has been fairly widely supported by other scholars. It is a basically sound
proposal. But to relate this to the idea of a distinction between the factual and ijtihadi ijma ` seems
questionable. Apart from the difficulty that might be involved in distinguishing a factual from a
juridical ijma' one can expect but little support for the view that the ijma` of the Companions on ijtihadi
matters is not binding.
Iqbal's views have, however, been criticised on other grounds. S. M. Yusuf has observed that Iqbal was
mistaken in trying to convert ijma` into a modern legislative institution. Yusuf argues that ijtihad and
ijma' have never been the prerogatives of a political organisation, and any attempt to institutionalise
ijma' is bound to alter the nature of ijma` and  defeat its basic purpose. For ijtihad  is a non-transferable
right of every competent scholar, and a mujtahid  is recognised by the community by virtue of his merits
known over a period of time, not through election campaigns or awards of official certificates. The
process of arriving at ijma` is entirely different from that of legislation in a modern state assembly.
Ijma' passes through a natural process which resembles that of the 'survival of the fittest'. No attempt is
made in this process to silence the opposition or to defeat the minority opinion. Opposition is tolerated
until the truth emerges and prevails. Ijma' is a manifestation of the conscience of the community, and it
is due mainly to the natural strength of ijma' and the absence of rigid organisation 'that no one is able to
lay his hands on Islam; when anyone tries to hammer Islam, he ultimately finds to his chagrin that he
has only been beating in the air'.[82. Yusuf, Studies , pp. 212-218. ]Ahmad Hasan finds some weaknesses In Yusuf's criticism of Iqbal, and observes that `Dr Yusuf has
probably not understood Iqbal's view correctly.' Hasan finds Iqbal's view to the effect that ijtihad  should
be exercised collectively instead of being a preserve of the individual mujtahidun , to be basically sound.
`Ijtihad  today cannot be exercised in isolation. Modern conditions demand that it should be exercised
collectively. A mujtahid  may be expert in Islamic learnings, but he cannot claim to be perfectly
acquainted with the social conditions of a country and the diverse nature of its problems.[83. Hasan, Doctrine. p.
244.] Ahmad Hasan goes on to point out that the legislative assembly is `the right place' for the purpose
of collective ijtihad , which would in turn provide an effective method of finding solutions to urgent
problems.[84. Hasan, Doctrine. p. 244.]The late Shaykh of al-Azhar, Mahmud Shaltut, observes that the conditions of a conclusive ijma`,
especially the one which requires the agreement of all the mujtahidun  of the ummah , is no more than a
theoretical proposition which is never expressed in reality. Ijma' , in reality, has often meant either the
absence of disagreement (` adam al-ilm bi'l-mukhalif ), or the agreement of the majority only ( ittifaq al-

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 178kathrah ). Both of these are acceptable propositions which may form the basis of general legislation.
Shaltut goes on to quote in support the Qur'anic ayah  in sura al-Baqarah (2:286) that `God does not
assign to any soul that which falls beyond its capacity.' Shaltut is not opposed to the institutionalization
of ijma` provided that this does not violate the freedom of opinion which must in all eventualities be
granted to the constituents of ijma`. Consensus must never be subjected to a condition which subjugates
freedom of opinion to the arbitrary exercise of political power. Shaltut further adds that since the
realization of maslahah  through consensus is the objective of ijma`, maslahah  as bound to vary
according to circumstances of time and place. Hence the mujtahidun  who participate in ijma`, and their
successors, should all be able to take into consideration a change of circumstances and it should be
possible for them to review a previous ijma` if this is deemed to be the only way to realize the
maslahah . Should they arrive at a second ijma`, this will nullify and replace the first, and constitute a
binding authority on all members of the community.[85. Shaltut,  Islam , pp. 558-559.]ConclusionUnder their classical definitions, ijma` and ijtihad  were both subject to conditions that virtually drove
them into the realm of utopia. The unreality of these formulations is reflected in modern times in the
experience of Muslim nations and their efforts to reform certain areas of the Shari'ah  through the
medium of statutory legislation. The juristic basis for some of the modern reforms introduced in the
areas of marriage and divorce, for example, has been sought through novel interpretations of the
relevant passages of the Qur'an. Some of these reforms may rightly be regarded as instances of ijtihad
in modern times. Yet in none of these instances do the statutory texts or their explanatory memoranda
make an open reference to ijtihad  or ijma`. The total absence of these terms in modern statutes is a sad
reflection of the unreality that is encountered in the strict definitions of these concepts. The classical
definitions of ijtihad  and ijma ` might, at one time, have served the purpose of discouraging excessive
diversity which was felt to be threatening the very existence and integrity of the Shari'ah . But there is
no compelling reason to justify the continued domination of a practice which was designed to bring
ijtihad to a close Ijtihad  and ijma' were brought to a standstill, thanks to the extremely difficult
conditions that were imposed on them, conditions which often ran counter to the enterprising and
creative spirit that characterised the period of the pious caliphs and the early imams of jurisprudence.
Dr Yusuf's criticism of Iqbal's proposed reform is based on the dubious assumption that an elected
legislative assembly will not reflect the collective conscience of the community and will unavoidably be
used as an instrument of power politics. Although the cautious advice of this approach may be
persuasive, the assumption behind it goes counter to the spirit of maslahah  and of the theory of ijma`
which endows the community with the divine trust of having the capacity and competence to make the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 179right decisions. If one is to observe the basic message of the textual authority in support of the ` ismah  of
the community, then one must trust the community itself to elect only persons who will honour their
collective conscience and their maslahah. In addition, Dr Yusuf's critique of Iqbal merely suggests that
nothing should he done to relate ijma' to the realities of contemporary life. The critic is content with the
idea of letting ijma` and ijtihad  remain beyond the reach of the individuals and societies of today. On
the contrary, the argument for taking a positive approach to ijma` is overwhelming. The gap between
the theory and practice of Shari'ah  law has grown to alarming proportions, and any attempt at
prolonging it further will have to be exceedingly persuasive. While the taking of every precaution to
safeguard the authentic spirit and natural strength of ijma` is fully justified, this should not necessarily
mean total inertia. The main issue in institutionalizing ijma`, as Shaltut has rightly assessed, is that
freedom of opinion should be vouchsafed the participants of ijma`. This is the essence of the challenge
which has to be met, not through a laissez-faire attitude toward ijtihad  and ijma`, but by nurturing
judicious attitudes and by evolving correct methods and procedures to protect freedom of opinion. The
consensus that is arrived at in this spirit will have kept a great deal, if not all, of the most valuable
features of ijma`.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 180Chapter Nine: Qiyas (Analogical Deduction)Literally, qiyas  means measuring or ascertaining the length, weight, or quality of something, which is
why scales are called miqyas . Thus the Arabic expression, qasat al-thawb bi'l-dhira' means that `the
cloth was measured by the yardstick'.[1. Amidi, Ihkam , III, 183.] Qiyas  also means comparison, with a view to
suggesting equality or similarity between two things. Thus the expression Zayd yuqas ila Khalid fi
`aqlihi wa nasabih means that `Zayd compares with Khalid in intelligence and descent'.[2. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II,
54.] Qiyas  thus suggests an equality or close similarity between two things, one of which is taken as the
criterion for evaluating the other.
Technically, qiyas  is the extension of a Shari'ah  value from an original case, or asl, to a new case,
because the latter has the same effective cause as the former. The original case is regulated by a given
text, and qiyas  seeks to extend the same textual ruling to the new case.[3. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 198.] It is by virtue
of the commonality of the effective cause, or 'illah , between the original case and the new case that the
application of qiyas  is justified.
A recourse to analogy is only warranted if the solution of a new case cannot be found in the Qur'an, the
Sunnah  or a definite ijma`. For it would be futile to resort to qiyas  if the new case could be resolved
under a ruling of the existing law. It is only in matters which are not covered by the nusus and ijma` that
the law may be deduced from any of these sources through the application of analogical reasoning.[4. Cf.
Abdur Rahim,  Jurisprudence , p.137.]In the usage of the  fuqaha' , the word 'qiyas' is sometimes used to denote a general principle. Thus one
often comes across statements that this or that ruling is contrary to an established analogy, or to a
general principle of the law without any reference to analogy as such.
Analogical deduction is different from interpretation in that the former is primarily concerned with the
extension of the rationale of a given text to cases which may not fall within the terms of its language.
Qiyas  is thus a step beyond the scope of interpretation. The emphasis in qiyas is clearly placed on the
identification of a common cause between two cases which is not indicated in the language of the text.
Identifying the effective cause often involves intellectual exertion on the part of the jurist, who
determines it by recourse not only to the semantics of a given text but also to his understanding of the
general objectives of the law.
Since it is essentially an extension of the existing law, the jurists do not admit that extending the law by
the process of analogy amounts to establishing a new law. Qiyas  is a means of discovering, and perhaps

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 181of developing, the existing law. Although qiyas  offers considerable potential for creativity and
enrichment, it is basically designed to ensure conformity with the letter and the spirit of the Qur'an and
the Sunnah . In this sense, it is perhaps less than justified to call qiyas  one of the sources ( masadir ) of
the Shari'ah ; it is rather a proof ( hujjah ) or an evidence ( dalil) whose primary aim is to ensure
consistency between revelation and reason in the development of the Shari'ah . Qiyas  a admittedly a
rationalist doctrine, but it is one in which the use of personal opinion ( ra'y) is subservient to the terms
of the divine revelation. The main sphere for the operation of human judgment in qiyas  is the
identification of a common 'illah between the original and the new case. Once the ` illah is identified,
the rules of analogy then necessitate that the ruling of the given text be followed without any
interference or change. Qiyas  cannot therefore be used as a means of altering the law of the text on
grounds of either expediency or personal preference.
The jurist who resorts to qiyas takes it for granted that the rules of Shari'ah  follow certain objectives
(maqasid ) which are in harmony with reason. A rational approach to the discovery and identification of
the objectives and intentions of the Lawgiver necessitates recourse to human intellect and judgment in
the evaluation of the ahkam . It is precisely on  this ground, namely the propriety or otherwise of
adopting an inquisitive approach to the injunctions of the Lawgiver, referred to as ta'lil, that qiyas  has
come under attack by the Mu'tazilah, the Zahiri, the Shi'i and some Hanbali ulema. Since an enquiry
into the causes and objectives of divine injunctions often involves a measure of juristic speculation, the
opponents of qiyas  have questioned its essential validity. Their argument is that the law must be based
on certainty, whereas qiyas  is largely speculative and superfluous. If the two cases are identical and the
law is clearly laid down in regard to one, there is no case for qiyas , as both will be covered by the same
law. If they are different but bear a similarity to one another, then it is impossible to know whether the
Lawgiver had intended the subsidiary case to be governed by the law of the original case. It is once
again in recognition of this element of uncertainty in qiyas  that the ulema of all the juristic schools have
ranked qiyas  as a 'speculative evidence'. With the exception, perhaps, of one variety of qiyas , namely
where the 'illah of qiyas  is clearly identified in the text, qiyas  in general can never be as high an
authority as the nass or a definite ijma' , for these are decisive evidences ( adillah qat'iyyah ), whereas
qiyas  in most cases only amounts to a probability. It is, in other words, merely probable, but not certain,
that the result of qiyas  is in conformity with the intentions of the lawgiver. The propriety of qiyas  is
thus always to be measured by the degree of its proximity and harmony with the nusus . In our
discussion of the methodology of qiyas  it will at once become obvious that the whole purpose of this
methodology is to ensure that under no circumstances does analogical deduction operate independently
of the nusus . It would be useful to start by giving a few examples.
1) The Qur'an (al-Jumu'ah, 62:9) forbids selling or buying goods after the last call for Friday prayer
until the end of the prayer. By analogy this prohibition is extended to all kinds of transactions, since the
effective cause, that is, diversion from prayer, is common to all.[5. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.52, Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 138.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 1822) The Prophet is reported to have said, 'The killer shall not inherit [from his victim]'
By analogy this ruling is extended to bequests, which would mean that the killer cannot benefit from the
will of his victim either.[6. Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , II, 242;  Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.53. ]3) According to a Hadith, it is forbidden for a man to make an offer of betrothal to a woman who is
already betrothed to another man unless the latter permits it or has totally abandoned his offer.
The 'illah of this rule is to obviate conflict and hostility among people. By analogy the same rule is
extended to all other transactions in which the same ` illah is found to be operative.[7. Abu Dawud Sunan  (Hasan's
trans. ) II, 556, Hadith no. 2075; Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 940, Hadith no.3144; Musa,  Ahkam , p. 45.]The majority of ulema have defined qiyas  as the application to a new case ( far'), on which the law is
silent, of the ruling ( hukm ) of an original case ( asl) because of the effective cause (' illah) which is in
common to both.[8. Amidi,  Ihkam , III, 186.] The Hanafi definition of qiyas  is substantially the same, albeit with a
minor addition which is designed to preclude certain varieties of qiyas  (such as qiyas al-awla and qiyas
al-musawi , [q.v,]) from the scope of qiyas . The Hanafi jurist, Sadr al-Shari'ah, in his Tawdih , as
translated by Aghnides, defines qiyas as `extending the ( Shari'ah ) value from the original case over to
the subsidiary ( far`) by reason of an effective cause which is common to both cases and cannot be
understood from the expression (concerning the original case) alone.'[9. `Ubaydullah ibn Mas'ud Sadr al-Shari'ah, al-
Tawdih fi Hall Ghawamid al-Tanqih , p. 444; Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 49. ] The essential requirements of qiyas which are
indicated in these definitions are as follows:
1) The original case, or asl, on which a ruling is given in the text and which analogy seeks to extend to
a new case.
2) The new case ( far`) on which a ruling is wanting.
3) The effective cause ( ` illah) which is an attribute ( wasf) of the asl and is found to be in common
between the original and the new case.
4) The rule ( hukm ) governing the original case which is to be extended to the new case.[10. Amidi ( Ihkam , III,
193) is however of the view that the result of qiyas , that is the ruling which is to be applied to the new case (i.e. hukm al-far `), should not be included in the
essential requirements ( arkan ) of qiyas . For the hukm  is only arrived at the end of the process; it should therefore not be rukn. Isnawi has on the other hand
included the hukm al-far` among the essentials of qiyas . The disagreement is perhaps mainly theoretical as the  hukm of the new case is, for all intents and purposes,
identical with the hukm  of the original case. Cf. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 58-59.] To illustrate these, we might adduce the example of the
Qur'an (al-Ma'idah, 5:90), which explicitly forbids wine drinking. If this prohibition is to be extended
by analogy to narcotic drugs, the four pillars of analogy in this example would be:

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 183asl                   far`               `Illah                       hukm
wine drinking  taking drugs  the intoxicating effect   prohibition
Each of the four essentials ( arkan ) of analogy must, in turn, qualify a number of other conditions which
are all designed to ensure propriety and accuracy in the application of qiyas . It is to these which we now
turn.I. Conditions Pertaining to the Original Case ( Asl)Asl has two meanings. Firstly, it refers to the source, such as the Qur'an or the Sunnah , which reveals a
particular ruling. The second meaning of asl is the subject-matter of that ruling. In the foregoing
example of the prohibition of wine in the Qur'an, the asl is both the Qur'an, which is the source, and
wine, which is the original case or the subject-matter of the prohibition. However, to all intents and
purposes, the two meanings of asl are convergent. We tend to use asl to imply the source as well as the
original case, for the latter constitutes the subject-matter of the former, and the one cannot be separated
from the other.[11. Shawkani, Irshad , pp.204-205; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 180.]The ulema are in unanimous agreement that the Qur'an and the Sunnah  constitute the sources, or the asl,
of qiyas. According to the majority of jurists, qiyas  may also be founded on a rule that is established by
ijma` validates guardianship over the property of minors, a rule which has been extended by analogy to
authorise the compulsory guardianship ( wilayah al-ijbar ) of minors in marriage.[12. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 181.]There is, however, some disagreement as to whether ijma `constitutes a valid asl for qiyas . Those who
dispute the validity of  ijma' as a basis of analogical deduction argue that the rules of consensus do not
require that there should be a basis ( sanad ) for ijma`. In other words, ijma' does not always explain its
own justification or rationale. In the absence of such information, it is difficult to construct an analogy.
In particular it would be difficult to identify the 'illah , and qiyas  cannot be constructed without the
`illah.[13. Khallaf,` Ilm, p.53, Shawkani, Irshad ,p.210.] But this view is based on the assumption that the ` illah of qiyas  is
always identified in the sources, which is not the case.
The ` illah may at times be specified in the sources, but when this is not so, it is for the mujtahid  to
identify it in the light of the objectives ( maqasid ) of the Lawgiver. The mujtahid , in other words, is
faced with the same task whether he derives the ` illah from ijma or from the nusus . Furthermore, the
majority view which validates the founding of analogy on ijma` maintains that consensus itself is a

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 184basis ( sanad ) and that the effective cause of a ruling which is based on consensus can be identified
through ijtihad .[14. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.128.]According to the majority of ulema, one qiyas  may not constitute the asl of another qiyas . This is
explained in reference to the effective cause on which the second analogy is founded. If this is identical
with the original ` illah, then the whole exercise would be superfluous. For instance, if it be admitted
that the quality of edibility is the effective cause which world bring an article within the scope of usury
(riba) then it would justify an analogy to be drawn between wheat and rice. But an attempt to draw a
second analogy between rice and edible oil for the purpose of extending the rules of riba to the latter
would be unnecessary, for it would be preferable to draw a direct analogy between wheat and edible oil,
which would eliminate the intermediate analogy with the rice altogether.[15. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 87; Shawkani, Irshad ,
p 205.]However, according to the prominent Maliki jurist, Ibn Rushd (whose views are here representative of
the Maliki school) and some Hanbali ulema, one qiyas  may constitute the asl of another: when one
qiyas  is founded on another qiyas , the far' of the second becomes an independent asl from which a
different 'illah may be deduced. This process may continue ad infinitum with the only proviso being
that in cases where an analogy can be founded in the Qur'an, recourse may not be had to another
qiyas .[16. Ibn Rushd, Bidayah , I, 4-5: Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 183; Nour, ` Qiyas' , 29.]  But al-Ghazali rejects the proposition of one
qiyas  forming the asl of another altogether. He compares this to the work of a person who tries to find
pebbles on the beach that look alike. Finding one that resembles the original, he then throws away the
original and tries to find one similar to the second, and so on. By the time he finds the tenth, it would
not be surprising if it turned out to be totally different from the first in the series. Thus, for al-Ghazali,
qiyas  founded on another qiyas  is like speculation built upon speculation, and the further it continues
along the line, the more real becomes the possibility of error.[17. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 87.]Having discussed Ibn Rushd's view at some length, however, Abu Zahrah observes that from a juristic
viewpoint, one has little choice but to agree with it. This is reflected, for example, in modern judicial
practice where court decisions are often based on the analogical extension of the effective cause (i.e.
ratio decidendi ) of an existing decision to a new case. The new decision may be based on the rationale
of a previous case but may differ with it in some respect. In this event the new case is likely to
constitute an authority in its own right. When, for example, the Cassation Court ( mahkamah al-naqd ) in
Egypt approves a judicial ruling, it becomes a point of reference in itself, and an analogy upon it is
made whenever appropriate without further inquiry into its origin. What Abu Zahrah is saying is that
the doctrine of stare decisis , which is partially adopted in some Islamic jurisdictions, takes for granted
the validity of the idea that one qiyas  may become the asl of another qiyas .[18. Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 184.]According to the Syrian jurist Mustafa al-Zarqa, the formula that one qiyas  may be founded on another
qiyas  has in it the seeds of enrichment and resourcefulness. No unnecessary restrictions should

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 185therefore be imposed on qiyas  and on its potential contribution to the Shari'ah .[19. Since al-Zarqa's work is not
available to me, my knowledge of his views is confined to the extent that he is quoted by Nour, ' Qiyas , 29.]II. Conditions Pertaining to the HukmA hukm  is a ruling, such as a command or a prohibition, which is dispensed by the Qur'an, the Sunnah
or ijma' , and analogy seeks its extension to a new case. In order to constitute the valid basis of an
analogy, the hukm  must fulfill the following conditions.
1) It must be a practical shar`i ruling, for qiyas  is only operative in regard to practical matters inasmuch
as this is the case with fiqh as a whole. Qiyas  can only be attempted when there is a hukm  available in
the sources. In the event where no hukm  can be found in any of the three sources regarding a case, and
its legality is determined with reference to a general maxim such as original freedom from liability ( al-
bara'ah al-asliyyah ), no hukm  could be said to exist. Original freedom from liability is not regarded as a
hukm shar`i  and may not therefore form the basis of qiyas .[20. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 205; Khudari, Usul , p. 295]2) The hukm must be operative, which means that it has not been abrogated. Similarly, the validity of
hukm  which is sought to be extended by analogy must not be the subject of disagreement and
controversy.[21. Amidi, Ihkam , III, 196-97.]3) The hukm  must be rational in the sense that the human intellect is capable of understanding the
reason or the cause of its enactment, or that the ` illah is clearly given in the text itself. For example, the
effective cause of prohibitions such as those issued against gambling and misappropriating the property
of another is easily discernable. But when a hukm cannot be so understood, as in the case of the number
of prostrations in salah , or the quantity of zakah , etc., it may not form the basis of analogical deduction.
Ritual performances, or ` ibadat , on the whole, are not the proper subject of qiyas  simply because their
effective causes cannot be ascertained by the human intellect. Although the general purpose of ` ibadat
is often understandable, this is not sufficient for the purpose of analogy. Since the specific causes ( al-
`ilal al-juz'iyyah ) of ` ibadat  are only known to Almighty God, no analogy can be based upon them.
All the rational ahkam  (al-ahkam al-ma`qulah ), that is, laws whose causes are perceivable by human
intellect, constitute the proper basis of qiyas . According to Imam Abu Hanifah, who represents the
majority opinion, all the nusus  of Shari'ah  are rational and their causes can be ascertained except where
it is indicated that they fall under the rubric of ` ibadat . The Zahiris, and 'Uthman al-Batti, a
contemporary of Abu Hanifah have, on the other hand, held that the effective causes of the nusus
cannot be ascertained without an indication in the nusus  themselves. This view clearly discourages

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 186enquiry into the causes of the rules of Shari'ah  and advises total conformity to them without any search
for justification or rationale.[22. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 185; Khallaf, 'Ilm, pp. 61-62.] 'We do not deny,' writes Ibn Hazm,
'that God has assigned certain causes to some of His laws, but we say this only when there is a nass to
confirm it.' He then goes on to quote a Hadith of the Prophet to the effect that 'the greatest wrong-doer
in Islam is one who asks about something, which is not forbidden, and it is then forbidden because of
his questioning'.
Ibn Hazm continues: we firmly deny that all the ahkam of Shari'ah can be explained and rationalised in
terms of causes. Almighty God enacts a law as He wills. The question of `how and why' does not and
must not be applied to His will. Hence it is improper for anyone to enquire, in the absence of a clear
text, into the causes of divine laws. Anyone who poses questions and searches for the causes of God's
injunctions 'defies Almighty God and commits a transgression'.[23. Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VIII, 102; Muslim, Sahih Muslim , I,
423, Hadith no, 1599.]  For he would be acting contrary to the purport of the Qur'an where God describes
Himself, saying, 'He cannot be questioned for His acts, but they will be questioned for theirs' (al-
Anbiya', 21:21). It is thus known, Ibn Hazm concludes, that causes of any kind are nullified from the
acts and words of God. For justification and ta'lil is the work of one who is weak and compelled
(mudtarr ), and God is above all this.[24. Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VIII, 103. ]The issue of causation acquires a special significance in the context of divinely-ordained laws, simply
because the revelation was discontinued with the demise of the Prophet, who is no longer present to
explain and identify the causes of the revealed laws. The Muslim jurists, like other believing Muslims,
have shown a natural reluctance to be too presumptuous in their efforts to identify the causes of the
divine laws. But the Issue does not pose itself in the same way regarding secular or man-made law. The
norm in regard to modern laws is that they all have identifiable causes which can be ascertained with
reasonable certainty. As such, analogical deduction in the context of modern law is a relatively easier
proposition. But there are certain restrictions which discourage a liberal recourse to analogy even in
modern law. For one thing, the operation of analogy in modern law is confined to civil law, as in the
area of crimes the constitutional principle of legality discourages the analogical extension of the text. It
should be further noted that owing to extensive reliance on statutory legislation, there is no crime and
no punishment in the absence of a statutory text which clearly defines the offence or the penalty in
question. Crimes and penalties are thus to be governed by the text of the law and not by the analogical
extension of the text. It will thus be noted that owing to the prevalence of statutory legislation in
modern legal systems the need for recourse to analogy has been proportionately diminished. This would
in turn explain why qiyas  tends to play a more prominent role in the Shari'ah  than in modern law.
But in Shari'ah  law too, as we shall later elaborate, there are restrictions on the operation of qiyas  in
regard to crimes and penalties. The qadi, as a result, may not draw analogies between, for example,
wine-drinking and hashish owing to the similar effects that they- might have on the human intellect.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 187Nor may the crime of zina be made the basis of analogy so as to apply its penalty to similar cases.[25.
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 222; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 185.]4) The fourth requirement concerning the hukm  is that it must not be confined to an exceptional
situation or to a particular state of affairs. Qiyas  is essentially designed to extend the normal, not the
exceptional, rules of the law. Thus when the Prophet admitted the testimony of Khuzaymah alone to be
equivalent to that of two witnesses, he did so by way of an exception. The precedent in this case is
therefore not extendable by analogy.[26. The relevant Hadith reads: 'If Khuzaymah testifies for anyone, that is sufficient as a proof.' Ghazali,
Mustasfa ; II, 88; Abu Dawud, Sunan , III, 1024, Hadith no.3600. ] Some of the rulings of the Qur'an which relate exclusively to
the Prophet, such as polygamy beyond the maximum of four, or the prohibition in regard to marriage
for the widows of the Prophet (al-Ahzab, 33:53) are similarly not extendable by analogy. The legal
norms on these matters have elsewhere been laid down in the Qur'an which enacts the minimum
number of witnesses at two, the maximum for polygamy at four, and allow a widow to remarry after the
expiry of the ` iddah  waiting period.
5) And lastly, the law of the text must not represent a departure from the general rules of qiyas  in the
first place. For example, traveling during Ramadan is the cause of a concession which exonerates the
traveler from the duty of fasting. The concession is an exception to the general rule which requires
everyone to observe the fast. It may therefore not form the basis of an analogy in regard to other types
of hardship. Similarly the concession granted in wudu' (ablution) in regard to wiping over boots
represents a departure from the general rule which requires washing the feet. The exception in this case
is not extendable by way of analogy to similar cases such as socks.
But according to the Shafi'is, when the 'illah of a ruling can be clearly identified, analogy may be based
on it even if the ruling was exceptional in the first place. For example, the transaction of 'araya , or the
sale of fresh dates on the tree in exchange for dry dates, is exceptionally permitted by a Hadith
notwithstanding the somewhat usurious nature of this transaction; the rules of riba forbidding exchange
of identical commodities of unequal quantity. The 'illah of this permissibility is to fulfill the need of the
owner of unripe dates for the dried variety. By way of analogy, the Shafi'is have validated the exchange
of grapes for raisins on the basis of a similar need. The Hanafis have, however, disagreed, as the riding
of 'araya is exceptional in the first place.[27. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p. 247, Hadith no. 920; Sha`ban, Usul , p 130.]III. The New Case ( Far')The far' is an incident or a case whose ruling is sought by recourse to analogy. The far` must fulfill the
following three conditions.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 1881) The new case must not be covered by the text or  ijma `. For in the presence of a ruling in these
sources, there will be no need for a recourse to qiyas . However, some Hanafi and Maliki jurists have at
times resorted to qiyas  even in cases where a ruling could be found in the sources. But they have done
so only where the ruling in question was of a speculative type, such as a solitary Hadith. We shall have
occasion to elaborate on this point later.
2) The effective cause of analogy must be applicable to the new case in the same way as to the original
case. Should there be no uniformity, or substantial equality between them, the analogy is technically
called qiyas ma'al-fariq , or ` qiyas  with a discrepancy', which is invalid. If, for example, the ` illah in the
prohibition of wine is intoxication then a beverage which only causes a lapse of memory would differ
with wine in respect of the application of 'illah , and this would render the analogy invalid.[28. Shawkani,
Irshad , p. 209.]To give another example, according to the Hanafis, a sane and adult woman is competent to conclude a
contract of marriage on her own behalf. They have inferred this by an analogy to the Qur'anic ruling (al-
Nisa, 4:6) which entitles her to enter business transactions at her own free will. The majority of jurists,
however, disagree, as they consider the analogy in question to be qiyas  with a discrepancy. Marriage
differs from other transactions; business transactions are personal matters but marriage concerns the
family and the social status of the parents and guardians. Hence an analogy between marriage and other
transactions is unjustified.[29. Sha`ban, Usul , p. 134.]3) The application of qiyas  to a new case must not result in altering the law of the text, for this would
mean overruling the text by means of qiyas  which is ultra vires . An example of this is the case of false
accusation ( qadhf ) which by an express nass (sura al-Nur, 24:4) constitutes a permanent bar to the
acceptance of one's testimony. Al-Shafi`i has, however, drawn an analogy between false accusation and
other grave sins ( kaba'ir ): a person who is punished for a grave sin may be heard as a witness after
repentance. In the case of false accusation, too, repentance should remove the bar to the admission of
testimony. To this the Hanafis have replied that an analogy of this kind would overrule the law of the
text which forever proscribes the testimony of a false accuser.[30. Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p.62.]On a similar note, the validity of the contract of salam  has been established in a Hadith which defines it
as the advance sale of an article to be delivered at a fixed date. But when the Shafi`i's hold that such a
contract is lawful even if no date is fixed for delivery, they are charged with introducing a change in the
law of the text.[31. Bukhari, Sahih  (Istanbul edn.), III, 44 ( Kitab al-Salam , Hadith no. 3); Sarakhsi ( Usul , p. 152) writes: The Prophet forbade the sale of
an object which does not exist at the time of sale but permitted salam  as an exception. Salam  is valid on condition that the time of delivery is stipulated and that the
parties are able to meet the conditions of their agreement. See also Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 145]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 189IV. The Effective Cause ( 'Illah )This is perhaps the most important of all the requirements of qiyas . `Illah  has been variously defined by
the ulema of usul. According to the majority, it is an attribute of the asl which is constant and evident
and bears a proper ( munasib ) relationship to the law of the text ( hukm ). It may be a fact, a circumstance,
or a consideration which the Lawgiver has contemplated in issuing a hukm . In the works of usul, the
`illah is alternatively referred to as  manat al-hukm (i.e. the cause of the hukm ), the sign of the hukm
(amarah al-hukm ), and sabab .[32.Shawkani, Irshad , p. 207; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 188.] Some ulema have attached
numerous conditions to the 'illah , but most of these are controversial and may be summarised in the
following five.[33. Note, for example, Shawkani, ( Irshad , p. 207-208) who has listed 24 conditions for the 'illah whereas the Maliki jurist, Ibn Hajib has
recorded only eleven.]1) According to the majority of ulema, the ` illah must be a constant attribute ( mundabit ) which is
applicable to all cases without being affected by differences of persons, time, place and circumstances.
The Malikis and the Hanbalis, however, do not agree to this requirement as they maintain that the ` illah
need not be constant, and that it is sufficient if the 'illah bears a proper or reasonable relationship to the
hukm . The difference between the two views is that the majority distinguish the effective cause from the
objective ( hikmah ) of the law and preclude the latter from the scope of the ` illah.[34. Khallaf, `Ilm, 64; Abu Zahrah,
Usul , p. 188.]The ` illah is constant if it applies to all cases regardless of circumstantial changes. To give an example,
according to the rules of pre-emption ( shuf`) the joint, or the neighbouring, owner of a real property has
priority in buying the property whenever his partner or his neighbour wishes to sell it. The ` illah in pre-
emption is joint ownership itself, whereas the hikmah  of this rule is to protect the partner/neighbour
against a possible harm that may arise from sale to a third party. Now the harm that the Lawgiver
intends to prevent may materialise, or it may not. As such, the hikmah  is not constant and may therefore
not constitute the ` illah of pre-emption. Hence the ` illah in pre-emption is joint ownership itself, which
unlike the hikmah  is permanent and unchangeable, as it does not fluctuate with such changes in
circumstances.
The majority view maintains that the rules of Shari'ah  are founded in their causes (` ilal), not in their
objectives ( hikam ). From this, it would follow that a hukm shar'i is present whenever its ` illah is present
even if its hikmah is not, and a hukm shar`i is absent in the absence of its 'illah even if its hikmah  is
present. The jurist and the judge must therefore enforce the law whenever its 'illah is known to exist
regardless of its hikmah . Hence it would be a mistake for the judge to entitle to the right of pre-emption
a person who is neither a partner nor a neighbouring owner on the mere assumption that he may be
harmed by the sale of the property to a certain purchaser.[35. Shawkani, Irshad , pp. 207-208, Khallaf, Ilm, pp.88-97.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 190The Malikis and the Hanbalis, on the other hand, do not draw any distinction between the 'illah and the
hikmah . In their view, the hikmah  aims at attracting an evident benefit or preventing an evident harm,
and this is the ultimate objective of the law. When, for example, the law allows the sick not to observe
the fast, the hikmah  is the prevention of hardship to them. Likewise the hikmah  of retaliation ( qisas ) in
deliberate homicide, or of the hadd  penalty in theft, is to protect the lives and properties of the people.
Since the realisation of benefit ( maslahah ) and prevention of harm ( mafsadah ) is the basic purpose of
all the rules of Shari'ah , it would be proper to base analogy on the hikmah .[36. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 188.]The Hanafis and the Shafi'is however maintain that the ` illah must be both evident and constant. In their
view the ` illah secures the hikmah  most of the time but not always. Their objection to the hikmah  being
the basis of analogy is that the hikmah  of the law is often a hidden quality which cannot be detected by
the senses, and this would in turn render the construction of analogy upon them unfeasible. The hikmah
is also variable according to circumstances, and this adds further to the difficulty of basing analogy on
it. The hikmah , in other words, is neither constant nor well-defined, and may not be relied upon as a
basis of analogy.
To give an example, the permission granted to travelers to break the fast while traveling is to relieve
them from hardship. This is the hikmah  of this ruling. But since hardship is a hidden phenomenon and
often varies according to persons and circumstances, it may not constitute the effective cause of an
analogy. The concession is therefore attached to traveling itself which is the `illah regardless of the
degree of hardship that it may cause to individual travelers.[37. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.64. ]To give another example, the 'illah in the prohibition of passing a red traffic light is the appearance of
the red light itself. The hikmah is to prevent traffic irregularities and accidents. Anyone who passes a
red light is committing an offence even if no accident is caused as a result. The 'illah and hikmah  can as
such exist independently of one another,
the latter being less easily ascertainable than the former. On a similar note, the ` illah in awarding a law
degree is passing one's final examinations and obtaining the necessary marks therein. The hikmah  may
be the acquisition of a certain standard of knowledge in the disciplines concerned. Now it is necessary
that university degrees are awarded on a constant and reliable basis, which is passing the exams. The
acquisition of legal knowledge often, but not always, goes hand in hand with the ability to pass exams,
but this by itself is not as readily ascertainable as are the exam results.
2) As already stated, the effective cause on which analogy is based must also be evident ( zahir ). Hidden
phenomena such as intention, goodwill, consent, etc., which are not clearly ascertainable may not
constitute the `illah of analogy. The general rule is that the ` illah must be definite and perceptible to the
senses. For example, since the consent of parties to a contract is imperceptible in its nature, the law
proceeds upon the act of offer and acceptance. Similarly the ` illah in establishing the paternity of a

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 191child is matrimonial cohabitation ( qiyam firash al-zawjiyyah ), or acknowledgement of paternity ( iqrar ),
both of which are external phenomena and are susceptible to evidence and proof. Since conception
through conjugal relations between the spouses is not an obvious phenomenon, it may not form the
'illah of paternity. On a similar note, the law adopts as the  'illah of legal majority, not the attainment of
intellectual maturity, but the completion of a certain age, which is evident and susceptible to proof.[38.
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 207, Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p.149; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. I89; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 69.]3) The third condition of 'illah is that it must be a proper attribute ( al-wasf al-munasib ) in that it bears a
proper and reasonable relationship to the law of the text ( hukm ). This relationship is munasib  when it
serves to achieve the objective ( hikmah ) of the Lawgiver, which is to benefit the people and to protect
them against harm. For example, killing is a proper ground on which to exclude an heir from
inheritance. For the basis of succession is the tie of kinship which relates the heir to the deceased, and is
severed and nullified by killing. Similarly, the intoxicating effect of wine is the proper cause of its
prohibition. An attribute which does not bear a proper relationship to the hukm  does not qualify as an
'illah . To give an example, murder must be retaliated for, not because the perpetrator happens to be a
Negro or an Arab, but because he has deliberately killed another. Similarly, wine is prohibited not
because of its colour or taste but because it is an intoxicant.[39. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 189; Khallaf, ` Ilm, pp. 69-70.]4) The `illah must be 'transient' ( muta'addi ), that is, an objective quality which is transferable to other
cases. For analogy cannot be constructed on a 'illah which is confined to the original case only. As the
Hanafis explain, the very essence of 'illah , as much as that of qiyas  in general, is its capability of
extension to new cases, which means that the 'illah must be a transferable attribute. Traveling, for
example, is the ` illah of a concession in connection with fasting. As such, it is an 'illah which is
confined to the asl and cannot be applied in the same way to other devotional acts ( ibadat ). Similarly, if
we were to confine the ` illah in the prohibition of wine to that variety which is derived from grapes, we
would be precluding all the other varieties of wine from the scope of the prohibition.
Transferability ( ta'diyah ) of the effective cause is not, however, required by the Shafi'is, who have
validated qiyas  on the basis of an ` illah which is confined to the original case (i.e.  'illah qasirah ). The
Shafi'is (and the Hanafi jurist, Ibn al-Humam) have argued that ta'diyah  is not a requirement of the
'illah : when the 'illah is confined to the original case, it is probable that the Lawgiver had intended it as
such. The probability may not be ignored merely for lack of ta'diyah . It is a requirement which is
intellectually conceived without due regard for the precise terms of the law itself. The Shafi'is have
further argued that the utility of the ` illah is not to be sought solely in its transferability. There is thus
no inherent objection to the possibility of an 'illah being confined to the original case. The ulema are,
however, in agreement that the textually prescribed causes must be accepted as they are regardless as to
whether they are inherently transient or not.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 192The requirement of ta`diyah would imply that the ` illah of analogy must be an abstract quality and not a
concrete activity or object. To illustrate this, we may again refer to the foregoing examples. Traveling,
which is a concession in connection with fasting, is a concrete activity, whereas intoxication is an
abstract quality which is not confined in its application. Similarly in the Hadith, regarding usury ( riba),
the `illah of its ruling which prohibits quantitative excess in the sale of the six specified articles is the
quality of such articles being saleable by the measurement of weight or capacity and not their particular
species. The Hadith thus provides that 'gold for gold, silver for silver, wheat for wheat, barley for
barley, dates for dates and salt for salt must be equal for equal, hand to hand [...]' Transaction in these
commodities must, in other words, be without excess on either side and delivery shall be immediate,
otherwise the transaction would amount to usury, which is forbidden. The 'illah of this prohibition is
none of the concrete objects that are specified but an attribute or a concept which applies to all, namely
their sale ability by capacity or weight.[40. Muslim, Sahih Muslim, p. 252. Hadith no. 949; Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 98; Khudari,  Usul , p. 320;
Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.190; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 151-2.]5) And finally, the effective cause must not be an attribute which runs counter to, or seeks to alter, the
law of the text. To illustrate this we may refer to the story of a judge, Imam Yahya of al-Andalus, who
was asked by an Abbasid ruler as to the penance ( kaffarah ) of having conjugal relations during daytime
in Ramadan. The judge responded that the kaffarah  in this case was sixty days of fasting. This answer
was incorrect as it sought to introduce a change in the text of the Hadith which enacted the kaffarah  to
be freeing a slave, or sixty days of fasting, or feeding sixty poor persons. The fatwa  given by the judge
sought to change this order of priority on the dubious assumption that freeing a slave (or feeding sixty
persons) was an easy matter for a ruler and he should therefore be required to observe the fasting only.
The ` illah of the penance in this case is held to be the breaking of the fast itself and not any disrespect
to the sanctity of Ramadan, nor having sexual intercourse with one's wife, which might have occurred
to the judge while formulating his fatwa .[41. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 187, 190, 194.]Our next discussion concerning the `illah relates to the question of how the 'illah can be identified. Are
there any methods which the jurist may utilise in his search for the correct cause/rationale of a given
law?Identification of the 'IllahThe effective cause of a ruling may be clearly stated, or suggested by indications in the nass, or it may
be determined by consensus. When the 'illah is expressly identified in the text, there remains no room
for disagreement. Differences of opinion arise only in cases where the 'illah is not identified in the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 193sources. An example of the 'illah which is expressly stated in the text occurs in sura al-Nisa (4:43): 'O
you believers! Do not approach salah while you are drunk.' This ayah  was revealed prior to the general
prohibition of wine-drinking in sura al-Ma'idah (5:93), but it provides, nevertheless, a clear reference to
intoxication, which is also confirmed by the Hadith 'every intoxicant is khamr  [wine] and every khamr
is forbidden'. [42. Abu Dawud, Sunan , III, 1043, Hadith no. 3672.]In another place, the Qur'an explains the effective cause of its ruling on the distribution of one-fifth of
war booty to the poor and the needy 'so that wealth does not accumulate in the hands of the rich' (al-
Hashr, 59:7).
Instances are also found in the Hadith where the text itself identifies the rationale of its ruling. Thus the
effective cause of asking for permission when entering a private dwelling is stated in the Hadith which
provides that 'permission is required because of viewing'.
The 'illah of asking for permission is thus to protect the privacy of the home against unsolicited
viewing.[43. Muslim, Sahih , p. 375, Hadith no. 1424; Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 74; Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VIII, 91; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 193. There are also passages
in the Qur'an on the subject of isti'shan , or asking permission before entering a private home. Note, for example, sura al-Nur (24:27) which enjoins: 'O you
believers, do not enter houses other than your own unless you act politely and greet their occupants.'] In these examples, the occurrence of
certain Arabic expressions such as kay-la (so as not to), li-ajli (because of), etc., are associated with the
concept of ratiocination ( ta`lil ) and provide definite indications as to the ` illah of a given ruling.[44.
Shawkani lists a number of other expressions such as li-alla , min ajli, la'allahu kadha, bi-sahab kadha, etc. a ll of which are associated with the idea of explaining
the causes ( Irshad , p. 211).]Alternatively, the text which indicates the ` illah may be a manifest nass (al-nass al-zahir ) which is in
the nature of a probability or an allusion ( al-ima' wa'l-isharah ). Indications of this type are also
understood from the language of the text and the use of certain Arabic particles such as  li, fa, bi, anna
and inna, which are known to be associated with  ta'lil . For example, in the Qur'anic text (al-Ma'idah,
5:38): `as to the thieves, male and female, cut off [ fa'qta'u ] their hands,' theft itself is the cause of the
punishment. Instances of this type are also found in sura al-Nur (24:2 and 4) regarding the punishment
of adultery and false accusation respectively. In sura al-Nisa' (4:34) we find another example, as
follows: `As for women whose rebellion [ nushuz ] you fear, admonish them ( fa-`izzuhunna ) and leave
them alone in their beds, and physically punish them.' In this text, nushuz  is the effective cause of the
punishment.[45. Imam Malik has by analogy extended the same penalties to a husband who ill-treats his wife. He must first be admonished; if he continues,
he must continue paying the wife her maintenance but she is not required to obey him; finally he may be subjected to physical punishment. See Abu Zahrah, Usul ,
p.193.] The writers on usul give numerous examples of instances where the Qur'an provides an indication,
however indirect, as to the ` illah of its rulings.[46. Note, for example, sura al-Baqarah (2:222) co ncerning conjugal relations with ones
wife during her menstruation, which are to be avoided. The text indicates menstruation to be the 'illah of its ruling. Shawkani, ( Irshad , pp. 212-213) provides an
exhaustive list of the particles of ta'lil with their illustrations from the Qur'an and the Hadith.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 194The text of a Hadith may allude to the ` illah of its ruling, There is, for example, a Hadith which
provides that the saliva of cats is clean 'for they are usually around you in the homes'.
Their domesticity, in other words, is the effective cause of the concession. Thus by way of analogy, all
domestic animals would be considered clean, unless it is indicated otherwise And lastly, in the Hadith
which provides that `the judge who is in a state of anger may not adjudicate,' anger itself is the `illah of
the prohibition.[47. Abu Dawud, Sunan , III, 1018, Hadith no 3582; Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 75; Shawkani, Irshad , pp. 210, 212.] By analogy, the
Companions have extended the ruling of this Hadith to anything which resembles anger in its effect
such as extreme hunger and depression. [48. Sha`ban, Usul, p. 151.]Sometimes the word sabab  is used as a substitute for 'illah . Although sabab  is synonymous with `illah
and many writers have used them as such, nevertheless, sabab  is normally reserved for devotional acts
(ibadat ) whose rationale is not perceptible to the human intellect. The text may sometimes provide an
indication as to its sabab . Thus we find in sura al-Isra' (17:78) which enjoins, `Perform the salah  from
the decline of the sun [ li-duluk al-shams ] until twilight at night,' the sabab  (cause) of salah  is the time
when the salah  is due. Since the cause of the ruling in this text is not discernable to human intellect, it is
referred to as a sabab  but not as an 'illah . From this distinction, it would appear that every 'illah is
concurrently a  sabab , but not every sabab is necessarily an 'illah . [49 . Khallaf, ` Ilm, pp. 67-68.]Next, the effective cause of a ruling may be established by consensus. An example of this is the priority
of germane over consanguine brothers in inheritance, the 'illah for which is held to be the former's
superior tie with the mother. This ruling of ijma' has subsequently formed the basis of an analogy
according to which the germane brother is also given priority over the consanguine brother in respect of
guardianship ( wilayah ). Ijma' has also determined the 'illah of the father's right of guardianship over the
property of his minor child to be the minority of the child. Once again this right has, by analogy, been
acknowledged for the grandfather.[50. Shawkani, Irshad , p.210.] No ijma' can, however, be claimed to exist in
regard to 'illah of the father's right of guardianship over the property of his minor daughter. While the
majority of ulema consider the 'illah in this case to be minority, for the Shafi'is, the 'illah in ijbar  is
virginity. The right of ijbar  thus terminates upon loss of virginity even if the girl is still a minor. [51.
Nawawi, Minhaj  (Howard's trans.), p. 284.]When the 'illah is neither stated nor alluded to in the text, then the only way to identify it is through
ijtihad . The jurist thus takes into consideration the attributes of the original case, and only that attribute
which is considered to be proper ( munasib ) is identified as the 'illah . For example, in the Hadith
referred to above concerning the penance of conjugal relations during daytime in Ramadan, it is not
precisely known whether the 'illah of the penance is the breaking of the fast ( iftar), or sexual
intercourse. Although intercourse with one's wife is lawful, it may be that in this context it is regarded
as a form of contempt for the sanctity of Ramadan. But it is equally reasonable to say that intercourse in
this context is no different to other forms of iftar, in which case it is the iftar itself that is the 'illah of

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 195penance. [52. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 54; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 194; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 78.] The method of reasoning which the
mujtahid  employs in such cases is called tanqih al-manat , or isolating the 'illah , which is to be
distinguished from two other methods referred to as takhrij al-manat (extracting the 'illah ) and  tahqiq
al-manat (ascertaining the  'illah ) respectively. This process of enquiry is roughly equivalent to what is
referred to by some ulema of usul as al-sidr wa'l-taqsim , or elimination of the improper and assignment
of the proper 'illah to the hukm .
Tanqih al-manat implies that a ruling may have more than one cause, and the mujtahid  has to identify
the one that is proper ( munasib ), as was the case in the foregoing examples. Literally, tanqih , means
'purifying', whereas manat  is another word for 'illah . Technically, tanqih al-manat means 'connecting
the new case to the original case by eliminating the discrepancy between them' ( ilhaq al-far' bi'l-asl bi-
ilgha' al-fariq ). [53. Shawkani, Irshad , pp. 221-22; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 194]Extracting the ` illah, or takhrij al-manat , is in fact the starting point to the enquiry concerning the
identification of 'illah , and often precedes tanqih al-manat In all areas where the text or ijma' does not
identify the effective cause, the jurist extracts it by looking at the relevant causes via the process of
ijtihad . He may identify more than one cause, in which case he has completed the step involved in
takhrij al-manat and must move on to the next stage, which is to isolate the proper cause. To illustrate
this, the prohibition of usury (riba) in wheat and five other articles is laid down in the Hadith. When the
jurist seeks to draw an analogy between wheat and raisins-to determine for example whether one should
apply the tax of one tenth by analogy to raisins-the 'illah may be any of the following: that both of them
sustain life, that they are edible, that they are both grown in the soil, or that they are sold by measure.
Thus far the jurist has completed the first step, namely extracting the ` illah. But then he proceeds to
eliminate some of these by recourse to tanqih al-manat . The first `illah is eliminated because salt,
which is one of the six articles, does not sustain life; the second is also eliminated because gold and
silver are not edible; and so is the third as neither salt nor precious metals are grown in the soil. The
`illah is therefore the last attribute, which comprises all the specified items in the Hadith of riba. The
difference between the two stages of reasoning is that in takhrij al-manat the jurist is dealing with a
situation where the `illah is not identified, whereas in tanqih al-manat , more than one cause has been
identified and his task is to select the proper 'illah .[54. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 55; Khallaf, Ilm, p. 77.]Ascertaining the ` illah, or tahqiq al-manat , follows the two preceding stages of investigation in that it
consists of ascertaining the presence of an ` illah in individual cases. For purposes of drawing an
analogy between wine and a herbal drink, for example, the investigation which leads to the conclusion
that the substance in question has the intoxicating quality in common with wine is in the nature of
tahqiq al-manat. Similarly, in the case of drawing an analogy between a thief and a pickpocket, the
investigation as to whether or not the latter falls under the definition of theft is in the nature of tahqiq
al-manat .[55. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.195; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 78. For other examples see Shawkani, Irshad , p. 222.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 196Varieties of QiyasFrom the viewpoint of the strength or weakness of the 'illah , the Shafi'i jurists have divided qiyas  into
three types:
a) 'Analogy of the Superior' ( qiyas al-awla ). The effective cause in this qiyas  is more evident in the new
case than the original case, which is why it is called qiyas al-awla . For example, we may refer to the
Qur'anic text in sura al-Isra' (17:23) which provides regarding parents: 'say not to them uff [i.e. a single
word of contempt] nor repel them, but address them in dignified terms'. By analogy it may be deduced
that the prohibition against lashing or beating them is even more obvious than verbal abuse. Similarly,
the, penance ( kaffarah ) of erroneous killing is, by way of analogy, applicable to intentional killing as
the transgression which invokes the kaffarah  is even more evident in the latter. This is the Shafi'i view,
but the Hanafis do not consider the first example to be a variety of qiyas  but a mere implication of the
text ( dalalah al-nass ) which falls within the scope of interpretation rather than analogy. Likewise the
Hanafis do not require kaffarah  for deliberate killing, a ruling which has been determined on grounds of
interpretation rather than qiyas .[56. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p. 41, Hadith no. 119; Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VII, 54-55; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.195-196.
Zuhayr, Usul , IV, p. 44. ]b) 'Analogy of Equals' ( qiyas al-musawi ). The 'illah in this type of qiyas  is equally effective in both the
new and the original cases, as is the ruling which is deduced by analogy. We may illustrate this by
reference to the Qur'an (al-Nisa', 4:2) which forbids 'devouring the property of orphans'. By analogy, it
is concluded that all other forms of destruction and mismanagement which lead to the loss of such
property are equally forbidden. But this is once again regarded by the Hanafis to fall within the scope of
interpretation rather than analogy. To give another example, according to a Hadith, a container which is
licked by a dog must be washed seven times.
The Shafi'is extend the same ruling by analogy to a container which is licked by swine. The Hanafis,
however, do not allow this Hadith in the first place.[57. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p. 41, Hadith no. 119; Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VII, 5 4-55;
Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.195-196. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, p. 44.]c) 'Analogy of the Inferior' ( qiyas al-adna ). The effective cause in this form of qiyas is less clearly
effective in the new case than the original case. Hence it is not quite so obvious whether the new case
falls under the same ruling which applies to the original case. For example, the rules of riba, prohibit
the exchange of wheat and of other specified commodities unless the two amounts are equal and
delivery is immediate. By analogy this rule is extended to apples, since both wheat and apples are
edible (according to Shafi'i) and measurable (according to Hanafi) jurists. But the `illah of this qiyas  is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 197weaker in regard to apples which, unlike wheat, are not a staple food. [57. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p. 41, Hadith no. 119;
Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VII, 54-55; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.195-196. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, p. 44.]This type of qiyas  is unanimously accepted as qiyas proper, but, as earlier stated, the Hanafis and some
Zahiris consider the first two varieties to fall within the meaning of the text. It would appear that the
Hanafis apply the term 'qiyas' only to that type of deduction which involves a measure of ijtihad . The
first two varieties are too direct for the Hanafis to be considered as instances of qiyas .[58. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 44-
45; Nour, 'Qiyas' , 24-45. ]Qiyas  has been further divided into two types, namely 'obvious analogy' ( qiyas jali ) and `hidden
analogy' ( qiyas khafi ). This is mainly a Hanafi division. In the former, the equation between the asl and
far` is obvious and the discrepancy between them is removed by clear evidence. An example of this is
the equation the ulema have drawn between the male and the female slave with regard to the rules of
manumission. Thus if two person, jointly own a slave and one of them sets the slave free to the extent
of his own share, it is the duty of the Imam to pay the other part-owner his share and release the slave.
This ruling is explicit regarding the male slave, but by an `obvious analogy' the same rule is applied to
the female slave. The discrepancy of gender in this case is of no consequence in regard to their
manumission.[59. Shawkani, Irshad , 222; Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I, 178; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 45.]The 'hidden analogy' ( qiyas khafi ) differs from the 'obvious' variety in that the removal of discrepancy
between the  asl and the far` is by means of a probability ( zann ). Shawkani illustrates this with a
reference to the two varieties of wine, namely nabidh , and khamr . The former is obtained from dates
and the latter from grapes. The rule of prohibition is analogically extended to nabidh  despite some
discrepancy that might exist between the two.[60. Shawkani, Irshad , 222; Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I, 178; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 45.] Another
example of qiyas khafi is the extension, by the majority of ulema (excepting the Hanafis), of the
prescribed penalty of zina to sodomy, despite a measure of discrepancy that is known to exist between
the two cases. And finally, the foregoing analysis would suggest that qiyas khafi and qiyas al-adna are
substantially concurrent.Proof ( Hujjiyyah ) of QiyasNotwithstanding the absence of a clear authority for qiyas  in the Qur'an, the ulema of the four Sunni
schools and the Zaydi Shi'ah have validated qiyas  and have quoted several Qur'anic passages in support
of their views. Thus, a reference is made to sura al-Nisa' (4:59) which reads, in an address to the
believers: `should you dispute over something, refer it to God and to the Messenger, if you do believe in
God'.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 198The proponents of qiyas  have reasoned that a dispute can only be referred to God and to the Prophet by
following the signs and indications that we find in the Qur'an and Sunnah . One way of achieving this is
to identify the rationale of the ahkam  and apply them to disputed matters, and this is precisely what
qiyas is all about [61. Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I, 197; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.175; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.54.] The same line of reasoning has been
advanced with regard to a text in sura al-Nisa' (4:105) which proclaims: `We have sent to you the Book
with the Truth so that you may judge among people by means of what God has shown you.' A judgment
may thus be based on the guidance that God has clearly given or on that which bears close similarity to
it.[62. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 64; Shatibi, Muwafaqat , III, 217; Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I. 198.] The Qur'an often indicates the rationale of its
laws either explicitly or by reference to its objectives. The rationale of retaliation, for example, is to
protect life, and this is clearly stated in the text (al-Baqarah. 2:79). Likewise, the rationale of zakah is to
prevent the concentration of wealth in a few hands, which is clearly stated in the Qur'an (al-Hashr,
59:7). Elsewhere in the Qur'an, we read in a reference to the permissibility of tayammum  (ablution with
sand in the absence of water) that `God does not intend to impose hardship on you' (al-Ma'idah, 5:6).
In all these instances, the Qur'an provides clear indications which call for recourse to qiyas . In the
absence of a clear ruling in the text, qiyas  must still be utilised as a means of achieving the general
objectives of the Lawgiver. It is thus concluded that the indication of causes and objectives, similitudes
and contrasts, would be meaningless if they were not observed and followed as a guide for conduct in
the determination of the ahkam .[63. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 176.]The proponents of qiyas  have further quoted, in support of their views, a verse in sura al-Hashr (59:2)
which enjoins: `Consider, O you possessors of eyes!' `Consideration' in this context means attention to
similitudes and comparison between similar things. Two other ayat which are variously quoted by the
ulema occur in sura al-Nazi`at, that `there is a lesson in this for one who fears' (79:26); and in Al-Imran
(3:13) which provides: 'in their narratives there was a lesson for those who possessed vision'.
There are two types of indication in the Sunnah  to which the proponents of qiyas have referred:
1) Qiyas is a form of ijtihad , which is expressly validated in the Hadith of Mu`adh b. Jabal. It is
reported that the Prophet asked Mu`adh upon the latter's departure as judge to the Yemen, questions in
answer to which Mu`adh told the Prophet that he would resort to his own ijtihad  in the event that he
failed to find guidance in the Qur'an and the Sunnah , and the Prophet was pleased with this reply. Since
the Hadith does not specify any form of reasoning in particular, analogical reasoning falls within the
meaning of this Hadith.[64. Abu Dawud, Sunan  (Hasan's trans.) III, 109 (Hadith 1038), Khallaf, `Ilm, p.56.]2) The Sunnah  provides evidence that the Prophet resorted to analogical reasoning on occasions when
he did not receive a revelation on a particular matter. On one such occasion, a woman known as al-
Khath 'amiyyah came to him and said that her father had died without performing the hajj. Would it

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 199benefit him if she performed the hajj on her father's behalf? The Prophet asked her: 'Supposing your
father had a debt to pay and you paid it on his behalf, would this benefit him?' To this her reply was in
the affirmative, and the Prophet said, `The debt owed to God merits even greater consideration.[65. Ghazali,
Mustasfa , II, 64; Shawkani,  Irshad , p. 212; Ibn Qayyim, I`lam , I, 200.]It is also reported that Umar b. al-Khattab asked the Prophet whether kissing vitiates the fast during
Ramadan. The Prophet asked him in return: `What if you gargle with water while fasting?' `Umar
replied that this did not matter. The Prophet then told him that `the answer to your first question is the
same'.[66. Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VII, 100; Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I, 200; Khallaf, `Ilm, p. 57. ]The Companions are said to have reached a consensus on the validity of qiyas . We find, for example,
that the first Caliph, Abu Bakr, drew an analogy between father and grandfather in respect of their
entitlements in inheritance. Similarly, `Umar ibn al-Khattab is on record as having ordered Abu Musa
al-Ash'ari `to ascertain the similitudes for purposes of analogy'.[67. Ibn Hazm, Ihkam, VII, 147; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 177.]Furthermore, the Companions pledged their fealty ( bay`ah ) to Abu Bakr on the strength of the analogy
that `Umar drew between two forms of leadership: 'Umar had asked the Companions, `Will you not be
satisfied, as regards worldly affairs, with the man with whom the Prophet was satisfied as regards
religious affairs?' And they agreed with 'Umar, notwithstanding the fact that the issue of succession was
one of the utmost importance.[68. Ibn Hazm,  Ihkam , VII, 160; Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I. 182.]  Again, when the Companions held
a council to determine the punishment of wine-drinking, `Ali b. Abi Talib suggested that the penalty of
false accusation should be applied to the wine drinker, reasoning by way of analogy, 'When a person
gets drunk, he raves and when he raves, he accuses falsely.'[69. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 223; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.177 ] It is
thus concluded that qiyas  is validated by the Qur'an, the Sunnah , and the  ijma' of the Companions.The Argument Against QiyasThis has been advanced mainly by the Zahiri school, and some Mu'tazilah, including their leader,
Ibrahim al-Nazzam. The leading Zahiri jurist, Ibn Hazm, is the most outspoken against qiyas . The main
points of his argument may be summarised as follows:
1) The rules of the Shari'ah are conveyed in the form of commands and prohibitions. There are also the
intermediate categories of 'recommended' ( mandub ) and `reprehensible' ( makruh ), which are essentially
two varieties of mubah  (permissible). There are thus only three types of ahkam : command, prohibition,
and permissibility. Should there be no clear text in respect of any matter, then it would fall under the
principle of ibadah  (permissibility) winch is established to the Qur'an.[70. Two of the Qur'anic ayat which validate ibahah
are as follows: It is He who has created for you all things that are on earth' (al-Baqarah, 2:29); and `O you believers! Make not unlawful the good things which God

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 200has made lawful to you' (al-Ma'idah, 5:90).] Commands and prohibitions are determined by the clear authority of the
Qur'an, the Sunnah , or ijma' , in whose absence
nothing else can determine an obligatory or a prohibitory injunction, and the matter would
automatically fall under the category of mubah . There is thus no room for analogy in the determination
of the ahkam .[71. Ibn Hazm,  Ihkam , VIII, 3. ]2) The supporters of analogy, according to Ibn Hazm, proceed on the assumption that the Shari'ah  fails
to provide a nass for every matter, an assumption which is contrary to the explicit provisions of the
Qur'an. Ibn Hazm goes on to quote the following to this effect: 'We have neglected nothing in the Book'
(al-An'am, 6:89); and 'We revealed the Book as an explanation for everything' (al-Nahl, 16:89). In yet
another passage, we read in the Qur'an: 'This day, I perfected year religion for you, and completed My
favour upon you' (al-Ma'idah, 5:4).
Since the ahkam  of the Lawgiver are all-inclusive and provide complete guidance for all events, our
only duty is to discover and implement them. To consider qiyas  as an additional proof would be
tantamount to an acknowledgement that the Qur'an fails to provide complete guidance.[72. Ibn Hazm,  Ihkam ,
VIII, 18.]3) Qiyas  derives its justification from an 'illah which is common to both the original and the new case.
The 'illah is either indicated in the text, in which case the ruling is derived from the text itself and qiyas
is redundant; or alternatively, where the 'illah is not so indicated, there is no way of knowing it for
certain. Qiyas therefore rests on conjecture, which must not be allowed to form the basis of a legal
ruling. This is, according to Ibn Hazm, the purport of the Qur'anic ayah  (al-Najm, 53:28) which
proclaims that `conjecture avails nothing against the truth. ' Identifying the 'illah in qiyas  is an exercise
in speculation, whereas the Qur'an enjoins us to 'pursue not that of which you have no knowledge' (al-
Isra', 17:36).[73. Ibn Hazm,  Ihkam , VIII, 9. ]4) And lastly, Ibn Hazm holds that qiyas  is clearly forbidden in the Qur'an.[74. Ibn Hazm,  Ihkam , VIII, 9] Thus we
read in sura al-Hujurat (49:1): 'O you believers! Do not press forward before God and His Messenger,
and fear God [...]', which means that the believers must avoid legislating on matters on which the
lawgiver has chose, to remain silent. The same point is conveyed in the Hadith where the prophet
ordered the believers as follows:
Ask me not about matters which I have not raised. nations before you were faced with destruction
because of excessive questioning and disputation with their prophets. When I command you to do
something, do it to the extent that you can, and avoid what I have forbidden. [75. Ibn Hazm,  Ihkam , VIII, 15.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 201Thus in regard to matters on which the nass is silent, it is not proper for a Muslim to take the initiative
in issuing a hukm , for he is ordered not to do so. Qiyas  therefore violates the express terms of the Qur'an
and the Sunnah .
To sum up, Ibn Hazm's argument is based on two main points, one of which is that the nusus  of the
Qur'an and Sunnah  provide for all event, and the other is that qiyas  is an unnecessary addition to the
nusus . Regarding the first point, the majority of ulema hold the view that the nusus  do admittedly cover
all events, either explicitly or through indirect indications. However, the Zahiris rely only on the
explicit nusus  and not on these indirect indications. The majority, on the other hand, go beyond the
confines of literalism and validate qiyas in the light of the general objectives of the Shari'ah . For the
majority, qiyas  is not an addition or a superimposition on the nusus , but their logical extension. Hence
the Zahiri argument that qiyas  violates the integrity of the nusus  is devoid of substance.[76. Abu Zahrah, Usul ,
pp. 179-80.]With reference to some of the Qur'anic passages that the opponents of qiyas  have quoted, especially on
the use of speculative evidence in law, it is contended that the ayat in question forbid recourse to
speculation ( zann ) in matters of belief only. As for the practical rules of fiqh, most of them partake in
zann , and a great deal of the nusus  are themselves speculative in their purport and implication ( zanni al-
dalalah ). But this does not necessarily mean that action upon them must be suspended. On the contrary,
a measure of diversity and variation in the practical rules of Shari'ah  is not only tolerated, but is
considered to be a sign of the bounty of Almighty God, and the essence of flexibility in the Shari'ah .[77.
Khallaf, ` Ilm, p 79. ]In principle, the Shi'ah Imamiyyah do not recognise the validity of qiyas , as they maintain that qiyas  is
pure conjecture which must be avoided. In addition, the Qur'an, the Sunnah  and the rulings of the
Imams, according to the Shi'i ulema, provide sufficient guidance for conduct, and any reference to
analogy is unnecessary and unwarranted.[78. Mutahhari, Jurisprudence , p. 21.] This is definitely the view of the
Akhbari branch of the Twelve Shi'ah, whose refutation of qiyas closely resembles that of the Zahiris.
But the Usuli branch of the Shi'ah validate action upon certain varieties of qiyas , namely qiyas  whose
'illah is explicitly stated in the text ( qiyas mansus al-`illah ), analogy of the superior ( qiyas al-awla ) and
obvious analogy ( qiyas jali ). These varieties of qiyas , in their view, are not mere speculations; they
either fall within the meaning of the text or else constitute a strong probability ( al-zann al-qawi ) which
may be adopted as a guide for conduct. But they validate this through recourse to ijtihad  and ` aql rather
than qiyas  per se. [79. For further details see Asghari, Qiyas , pp.119,13 9.]Qiyas  in Penalties

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 202The ulema of the various schools have discussed the application of qiyas  to juridical, theological,
linguistic, rational and customary matters, but the main question which needs to be discussed here is the
application of analogy in regard to prescribed penalties ( hudud ) and penances ( kaffarat ).
The majority of ulema do not draw any distinction in this respect, and maintain the view that qiyas  is
applicable to hudud  and kaffarat  in the same way as it is to other rules of the Shari'ah . This is explained
by reference to the Qur'anic passages and the ahadith which are quoted in support of qiyas , which are
all worded in absolute terms, none drawing any distinction in regard to penalties: and since the evidence
in the sources does not impose any restriction on  qiyas , it is therefore applicable in all spheres of the
Shari'ah .[80. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 51; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 205.] An example of qiyas  in regard to the hudud  is the
application of the punishment of theft to the nabbash , or thief who steals the shroud of the dead, as the
common ` illah between them is taking away the property of another without his knowledge. A Hadith
has also been quoted in support of this ruling.[81. The following Hadith is recorded in Abu Dawud ( Sunan , III, 1229, Hadith no. 4395):
'The hand of one who rifles the grave should be amputated, as he has entered the house of deceased.'] Similarly the majority of ulema
(excluding the Hanafis) have drawn an analogy between zina and sodomy, and apply the hadd  of the
former by analogy to the latter.[82. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 222.]The Hanafis are in agreement with the majority to the extent that qiyas  may validly operate in regard to
ta'zir  penalties, but they have disagreed as to the application of qiyas  in the prescribed penalties and
kaffarat . They would not, for example, approve of an analogy between abusive words ( sabb ) and false
accusation ( qadhf ), nor would they extend the hadd  of zina by analogy to other sexual offences. These,
according to the Hanafis, may be penalised under ta'zir  but not by analogy to the hudud . The main
reason that the Hanafis have given is that qiyas  is founded on the 'illah , whose identification in regard
to the hudud , involves a measure of speculation and doubt. There is a Hadith which provides: `drop the
hudud  in cases of doubt as far as possible. If there is a way out, then clear the way, for in penalties, if
the Imam makes an error on the side of leniency, it is better than making an error on the side of
severity'.[83. Tabrizi,  Mishkat , II, 1061, Hadith No 3570; Abu Yusuf, Kitab al Kharaj , p. 152; Ibn Qayyim, I'lam , I, 209.]It is thus concluded that any level of doubt in ascertaining the ` illah of hadd  penalties must prevent their
analogical extension to similar cases.[84. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 205.]As stated above, the majority validate the application of qiyas  in regard to kaffarat . Thus the analogy
between the two forms of breaking the fast ( iftar), namely deliberate eating during daytime in
Ramadan, and breaking the fast by having sexual intercourse, would extend the kaffarah  of the latter to
the former. Similarly the majority have validated the analogy between deliberate killing and erroneous
homicide for purposes of kaffarah . The Qur'an only prescribes a kaffarah  for erroneous killing, and this
is extended by analogy to deliberate homicide. The common 'illah between them is the killing of
another human being. If kaffarah  is required in erroneous killing, then by way of a superior analogy
(qiyas al-awla ) the 'illah is even more evident in the case of a deliberate killing. Both are therefore

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 203liable to the payment of kaffarah , which is releasing a slave, or two months of fasting, or feeding sixty
persons. The Hanafis are once again in disagreement with the majority, as they maintain that for
purposes of analogy, the kaffarah  resembles the hadd . Since doubt cannot be totally eliminated in the
identification of their effective causes, kaffarat  may not be extended by means of analogy.[85. Zuhayr, Usul ,
IV, 51.]Notwithstanding the fact that the jurists have disagreed on the application of qiyas  in penalties, it will
be noted that the ulema have on the whole discouraged recourse to qiyas  in the field of criminal law.
Consequently, there is very little actual qiyas  to be found in this field. This is also the case in modern
law, which discourages analogy in respect of penalties. The position is somewhat different to regard to
civil transactions ( mu`amalat ), in which qiyas  is generally permitted.[86. Abu Zahrah,  Usul , p. 206.]Conflicts between Nass  and QiyasSince the 'illah in analogy is a general attribute which applies to all similar cases, there arises the
possibility of qiyas coming into conflict with the nusus . The question to be asked is how such a conflict
should be removed. Responding to this question, the ulema have held two different views, which may
be summarised as follows:
1) According to Imam Shafi'i, Ahmad b. Hanbal, and one view which is attributed to Abu Hanifah,
whenever there is a nass on a matter qiyas  is absolutely redundant. Qiyas  is only applicable when no
explicit ruling could be found in the sources. Since recourse to qiyas  in the presence of nass is ultra
vires in the first place, the question of a conflict arising between the nass and qiyas  is therefore of no
relevance.[87. Abu Zahrah,  Usul , p. 200.]2) The second view, which is mainly held by the Malikis, also precludes the possibility of a conflict
between qiyas  and a clear text, but does not dismiss the possibility of a conflict arising between a
speculative text and qiyas . Analogy could, according to this view, come into conflict with the ` Amm  of
the Qur'an and the solitary Hadith.
The Hanafis have maintained that the 'Amm is definitive in implication ( qat`i al-dalalah ), whereas qiyas
is speculative. As a rule, a speculative item cannot qualify a definitive one, which would mean that
qiyas  does not specify the 'Amm of the Qur'an. The only situation where the Hanafis envisage a conflict
between qiyas and the `Amm of the Qur'an is where the `illah of qiyas  stated in a clear nass. For in this
case, a conflict between the 'Amm of the Qur'an and qiyas  would be that of one  qat'i  with another.
However, for the most part qiyas  is a speculative evidence, and as such may not specify the 'Amm of the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 204Qur'an. But once the 'Amm is specified, on whatever grounds, then it becomes speculative itself, at least
in respect of that part which remains unspecified. After the first instance of specification ( takhsis ), in
other words, the 'Amm becomes speculative, and is then open to further specification by means of qiyas .
For example, the word bay` (sale) in the Qur'anic text stating that 'God has permitted sale and
prohibited usury' (al-Baqarah, 2:275) is ` Amm , but has been qualified by solitary ahadith  which prohibit
certain types of sale. Once the text has been so specified, it remains open to further specification by
means of qiyas .[88. Abu Zahrah,  Usul , pp. 201-202.]This was the Hanafis' view of conflict between a general text and qiyas . But the Malikis who represent
the majority view, consider the ` Amm  of the Qur'an to be speculative in the first place. The possibility is
therefore not ruled out, according to the majority, of a conflict arising between the nass and qiyas . In
such an event, the majority would apply the rule that one speculative principle may be specified by
another. Based on this analysis, qiyas , according to most of the jurists, may specify the ` Amm  of the
Qur'an and the Sunnah .[89. Abu Zahrah,  Usul , p. 203.]As for conflict between qiyas  and a solitary Hadith, it is recorded that Imam Shafi`i, Ibn Hanbal and
Abu Hanifah do not give priority to qiyas  over such a Hadith. An example of this is the vitiation of
ablution ( wudu' ) by loud laughter during the performance of salah , which is the accepted rule of the
Hanafi school despite its being contrary to qiyas . Since the rule here is based on the authority of a
solitary Hadith, the latter has been given priority over qiyas , for qiyas  would only require vitiation of
salah , not the wudu' .[90. Bukhari, Sahih  (Istanbul edn.), I, 51 ( Kitab al-Wudu' , Hadith no. 34); Khan, Athar , p. 403.]Although the three Imams are in agreement on the principle of giving priority to solitary Hadith over
qiyas , regarding this particular Hadith, only the Hanafis have upheld it. The majority, including Imam
Shafi'i, consider it to be Mursal  and do not act on it.
Additionally, there are other views on the subject which merit brief attention. Abu'l Husayn al-Basri, for
example, divides qiyas into four types, as follows:
1 ) Qiyas  which is founded in a decisive nass, that is, when the original case and the effective cause are
both stated in the nass. This type of qiyas  takes priority over a solitary Hadith.
2) Qiyas  which is founded in speculative evidence, that is, when the asl is a speculative text and the
'illah is determined through logical deduction ( istinbat ). This type of qiyas  is inferior to a solitary
Hadith and the latter takes priority over it. Al-Basri has claimed an 'ijma on both one and two above.
3) Qiyas  in which both the asl and the 'illah are founded in speculative nusus , in which case it is no
more than a speculative form of evidence and, should it conflict with a solitary Hadith, the latter takes
priority. On this point al-Basri quotes Imam Shafi'i in support of his own view.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 2054) Qiyas  in which the ` illah is determined through istinbat but whose asl is a clear text of the Qur'an or
Mutawatir  Hadith. This type of qiyas  is stronger than two and three above, and the ulema have differed
as to whether it should take priority over a solitary Hadith.[91. Basri, Mu`tamad , II, 162-64.]The Malikis, and some Hanbali ulema, are of the view that in the event of a conflict between a solitary
Hadith and qiyas,  if the latter can be substantiated by another principle or asl of the Shari'ah , then it
will take priority over a solitary Hadith. If for example the `illah of qiyas  is `removal of hardship',
which is substantiated by several texts, then it will add to the weight of qiyas , and the latter will take
priority over a solitary Hadith. For this kind of evidence is itself an indication that the Hadith in
question is weak in respect of authenticity.[92. Abu Zahrah,  Usul , p. 204.] Similarly, some Hanafis have
maintained that when a solitary Hadith, which is in conflict with qiyas , is supported by another qiyas ,
then it must be given priority over the conflicting qiyas . This is also the view which Ibn al-'Arabi has
attributed to Imam Malik, who is quoted to the effect that whenever a solitary Hadith is supported by
another principle, then it must take priority over qiyas . But if no such support is forthcoming, then the
solitary Hadith must be abandoned. For example, the following Hadith has been found to be in conflict
with another principle: `When a dog licks a container, wash it seven times, one of which should be with
clean sand.[93. Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VIII, 79; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 205.]It is suggested that this solitary Hadith is in conflict with the permissibility of eating the flesh of game
which has been fetched by a hunting dog. The game is still lawful for consumption notwithstanding its
having come into contact with the dog's saliva. There is, on the other hand, no other principle that could
be quoted in support of either of the two rulings, so qiyas  takes priority over the solitary Hadith. Our
second example is of a solitary Hadith which is in conflict with one principle but stands in accord with
another. This is the Hadith of 'araya , which provides that `the Prophet (upon whom be peace) permitted
the sale of dates on the palm tree for its equivalent in dry dates'. This is permitted despite its being in
conflict with the rules of riba, However the permissibility in this case is supported by the principle of
daf` al-haraj `removal of hardship' in that the transaction of araya  was permitted in response to a need,
and, as such, it takes priority over the qiyas  which might bring it under the rules of riba.[94. Abu Dawud, Sunan
(Hasan's trans.) II, 955, Hadith 3355; Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , VIII, 106; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 50-58; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 205.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 206Chapter Ten: Revealed Laws Preceding the Shari'ah  of IslamIn principle, all divinely revealed laws emanate from one and the same source, namely, Almighty God,
and as such they convey a basic message which is common to them all. The essence of belief in the
oneness of God and the need for divine authority and guidance to regulate human conduct and the
values of morality and justice constitute the common purpose and substance of all divine religions. This
essential unity is confirmed in more than one place in the Qur'an, which proclaims in an address to the
Holy Prophet: `He has established for you the same religion as that which He enjoined upon Noah, and
We revealed to you that which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses and Jesus, namely, that you should
remain steadfast in religion and be not divided therein' (al-Shura, 42:13). More specifically, in a
reference to the Torah, the Qur'an confirms its authority as a source of inspiration and guidance: We
revealed the Torah in which there is guidance ( huda ) and light; and prophets who submitted to God's
will have judged the Jews by the standards thereof' (al-Ma'idah, 5:44). It is thus observed that
Muhammad, being one of the Prophets, is bound by the guidance that is found in the Torah. Further
confirmation for the basic harmony of the divinely revealed laws can be found in the Qur'anic ayah
which, in a reference to the previous Prophets, directs the Prophet of Islam to follow their guidance:
`Those are the ones to whom God has given guidance, so follow their guidance [ hudahum ]' (al-Anam
6:90). Basing themselves on these and similar proclamations in the Qur'an, the ulema are unanimous to
the effect that all the revealed religions are different manifestations of an essential unity.[1. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.
241; Qasim, Usul , p. 173.] This is, of course, not to say that there are no differences between them. Since each
one of the revealed religions was addressed to different nations at different points of time, they each
have their distinctive features which set them apart from the rest. In the area of halal  and haram , for
example, the rules that are laid down by different religions are not identical. Similarly, in the sphere of
devotional practices and the rituals of worship, they differ from one another even if the essence of
worship is the same. The Shari'ah of Islam has retained many of the previous laws, while it has in the
meantime abrogated or suspended others. For example, the law of retaliation ( qisas ) and some of the
hadd  penalties which were prescribed in the Torah have also been prescribed in the Qur'an.[2. Abu Zahrah,
Usul , p. 242; Badran, Usul , p.237.]The general rule to be stated here is, however, that notwithstanding their validity in principle, laws that
were revealed before the advent of Islam are not applicable to the Muslims. This is especially so with
regard to the practical rules of Shari'ah , that is, the ahkam , in which the Shari'ah  of Islam is self-
contained. The jurists are also in agreement to the effect that the laws of the previous religions are not
to be sought in any source other than that of the Shari'ah  of Islam itself. For the rules of other religions
do not constitute a binding proof as far as the Muslims are concerned. The Shari'ah , in other words, is
the exclusive source of all law for the Muslims.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 207In view of the ambivalent character of the evidence on this subject, however, the question has arisen as
to the nature of the principle that is to be upheld: whether to regard the laws preceding the Shari'ah  of
Islam as valid unless they are specifically abrogated by the Shari'ah , or whether to regard them as
basically nullified unless they are specifically upheld. In response to this, it is said that laws that were
introduced in the previous scriptures but which are not upheld by the Shari'ah , and on which no ruling
is found in the Qur'an or the Sunnah  are not, according to general agreement, applicable to the Muslims.
The correct rule regarding the enforcement of the laws of the previous revelations is that they are not to
be applied to the followers of Islam unless they are specifically upheld by the Shari'ah .[3. Badran, Usul , p.234;
Isma'il, Adillah , p.320.]Once again the question arises as to whether the foregoing statement is in harmony with the Qur'anic
proclamations that were quoted above. The general response given to this is that the Prophet of Islam
was ordered to follow the previous revelations as a source of guidance only in regard to the essence of
the faith, that is, belief in God and monotheism. It has thus been pointed out that the word huda
`guidance' in the second ayah , and hudahum  'their guidance' in the third ayah quoted above only mean
tawhid , or belief in the oneness of God, which is undoubtedly the norm in the Shari'ah  of Islam. Their
guidance cannot be upheld in toto in the face of clear evidence that some of their laws have been
abrogated. The reference is therefore to that aspect of guidance which is in common between Islam and
the previous religions, namely  tawhid . It has been further suggested that the reference to 'Prophets' in
the second ayah  above is confined, as the text itself suggests, to the Prophets of Bani Isra'il, and the
holy Prophet Muhammad is not one of them.[4. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 134; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 242; Isma'il, Adillah , p.325]The Qur'an on many occasions refers to the rules of previous revelations on specific issues, but the
manner in which these references occur is not uniform. The Qur'an alludes to such laws in the following
three forms:
1. The Qur'an (or the Sunnah ) may refer to a ruling of the previous revelation and simultaneously make
it obligatory on the Muslims, in which case there remains no doubt that the ruling so upheld becomes an
integral part of the Shari'ah  of Islam. An example of this is the Qur'anic text on the duty of fasting
which provides: 'O believers, fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those who came
before you' (al-Baqarah, 2:183). To give a similar example in the Sunnah , which confirms the ruling of
a previous religion, we may refer to the Hadith which makes sacrifice by slaughtering animals lawful
for Muslims. The believers are thus instructed to `Give sacrifice, for it is the tradition of your ancestor,
Abraham, peace be upon him'. [5. Tabrizi, Mishkat , I, 466, Hadith no.1476; Badran, Usul , p. 235.]2. The Qur'an or the Sunnah may refer to a ruling of the previous revelation but at the same time
abrogate and suspend it, in which case the ruling in question is to be abandoned and discontinued. An
example of this can be found in the Qur'an where a reference is made to the prohibition of certain

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 208varieties of food to the Jews while at the same time the prohibitions are lifted from the Muslims. The
text thus provides: 'And to the Jews We forbade every animal having claws and of oxen and sheep, We
forbade the fat [. . .] Say: nothing is forbidden to eat except the dead carcass, spilled blood, and pork'
(al-An'am, 16:146). The second portion of this text clearly removes the prohibitions that were imposed
upon the Jews. For a similar example in the Sunnah , we may refer to the Hadith concerning the legality
of spoils of war where the Prophet has proclaimed: 'Taking booty has been made lawful to me, but it
was not lawful to anyone before me.'[6. Muslim, Sahih , p.301, Hadith no. 1137; Badran, Usul , p.234. ]Likewise, the expiation ( kaffarah ) for sins was not acceptable under the Torah; and when a garment
became unclean, the unclean portion had to be cut out according to the rules of Judaism. But these
restrictions were lifted with the effect that the Shari'ah  of Islam validated expiation for sins, and clothes
can be cleaned by merely washing them with clean water.[7. Khallaf, Ilm, p.93; Isma'il, Adillah , p.320.]3. The Qur'an or the Sunnah  may refer to a ruling of the previous revelation without clarifying the
position as to whether it should be abandoned or upheld. Unlike the first two eventualities, on which
there is little disagreement among jurists, the present situation has given rise to wider differences of
opinion. To give an example, we read in the Qur'an, in a reference to the law of retaliation which was
enacted in the Torah: 'We ordained therein for them life for life, eye for eye, nose for nose, tooth for
tooth and wounds equal for equal' (al-Ma'idah, 5:48). Here there is no clarification as to whether the
same law has to be observed by the Muslims. In yet another passage in the same sura the Qur'an stresses
the enormity of murder in the following terms: 'We ordained for the children of Israel that anyone who
slew a person, unless it be for murder or mischief in the land, it would be as if he slew the whole of
mankind' (al-Ma'idah, 5:35). Once again, this ayah  narrates a law of the previous revelation but does
not specify whether this also constitutes a part of the Shari'ah  of Islam.
The majority of Hanafi, Maliki, Hanbali and some Shafi'i jurists have held the view that the foregoing is
a part of the Shari'ah  of Islam and the mere fact that the Qur'an refers to it is sufficient to make the law
of retaliation binding on the Muslims. For the Lawgiver spoke of the law of the Torah to the Muslims
and there is nothing in the Shari'ah  of Islam
either to abrogate it or to warrant a departure from it. This is the law of God which He spoke of to us
that He might be obeyed. It is on the basis of this conclusion that the Hanafis have validated the
execution of a Muslim for murdering a non-Muslim (i.e. a dhimmi ), and a man for murdering a woman,
as they all fall within the meaning of the Qur'anic phrase 'life for life'.[8. Khallaf, Ilm, p.94; Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 489;
Badran, Usul, p.235.] There are some variant opinions on this, but even those who disagree with the Hanafi
approach to this issue subscribe to the same principle which they find enunciated elsewhere in the
Qur'an. In particular, two ayat have been quoted, one of which proclaims, 'and the punishment of an
evil is an evil like it' (al-Shura, 42:40); and the other that, 'Whoever acts aggressively against you,
inflict injury on him according to the injury he has inflicted on you, and keep your duty to God [...]' (al-

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 209Baqarah, 2:194). It is thus concluded that these ayat provide sufficient evidence in support of the law of
retaliation even without any reference to previous revelations.
The majority of the Shafi'is, the Ash'arites, and the Mu'tazilah have maintained the view that since
Islam abrogated the previous laws, they are no longer applicable to the Muslims; and hence these laws
do not constitute a part of the Shari'ah  of Islam unless they are specifically validated and confirmed.
They maintain that the Shari'ah  norm regarding the laws of the previous religions is `particularity'
(khusus ), which means that they are followed only when specifically upheld; whereas the norm with
regard to the Shari'ah  itself is generality ( 'umum ) in that it is generally applied as it has abrogated all the
previous scriptures.[9. Shawkani, Irshad , p.240; Shaltut, Al-Islam , p. 489; Badran, Usul , p. 236. ] This restriction is necessitated in
view of the fact that the previous religions have not been correctly transmitted to us and have
undergone considerable distortion.[10. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence. p.70.] The proponents of this view have quoted
in support the Qur'anic text which declares, in a reference to different nations and communities: 'For
every one of you We have ordained a divine law and an open road' (al-Ma'idah, 5:48). Thus it is
suggested that every nation has a Shari'ah  of its own, and therefore the laws that were revealed before
Islam are not binding on this ummah . Further evidence for this view has been sought in the Hadith of
Mu`adh b. Jabal which indicates only three sources for the Shari'ah , namely the Qur'an, the Sunnah  and
ijtihad .[11. Abu Dawud, Sunan  (Hasan's trans.), III, 1019. Hadith no.3585.] The fact that this Hadith has made no reference to
previous revelations must mean that they are not a source of law for the followers of Islam. This last
point has, however, been disputed in that when Mu`adh referred to the Qur'an, it was sufficient, as the
Qur'an itself contains numerous references to other revealed scriptures. Further more it is well-known
that the Prophet did not resort to the Torah and Injil in order to find the rulings of particular issues,
especially at times when he postponed matters in anticipation of divine revelation. This would
obviously imply that the Prophet did not regard the previous laws as binding on his own community.[12.
Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 133. The only exception which is cited in this connection is when the Prophet referred to the Torah on the stoning of Jews for adultery. But
this was only to show, as Ghazali explains, that stoning ( rajm ) was not against their religion, and not because the Prophet regarded the Torah as a source of law.]The correct view is that of the majority, which maintains that the Shari`ah of Islam only abrogates rules
which were disagreeable to its teachings. The Qur'an, on the whole, confirms the Torah and the Injil,
and whenever a ruling of the previous scriptures is quoted without abrogation, it becomes an integral
part of the Shari'ah  of Islam.[13. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 94 .] And finally, it may be added, as Abu Zahrah has pointed
out, that disagreement among jurists on the authority or otherwise of the previous revelations is of little
practical consequence, as the Shari'ah  of Islam is generally self-contained and its laws are clearly
identified. With regard to retaliation, for example, notwithstanding the differences of opinion among the
jurists as to the precise import of the Qur'anic references to this subject, the issue is resolved, once and
for all, by the Sunnah which contains clear instructions on retaliation and leaves no doubt that it is an
integral part of the Shari'ah  of Islam.[14. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 242.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 210Chapter Eleven: The Fatwa  of a CompanionThe Sunni ulema are in agreement that the consensus ( ijma`) of the Companions of the Prophet is a
binding proof, and represents the most authoritative form of ijma' . The question arises, however, as to
whether the saying or fatwa  of a single Companion should also be recognised as a proof, and given
precedence over evidences such as qiyas  or the fatwas  of other mujtahidun . A number of leading jurists
from various schools have answered this question in the affirmative, and have held the view that the
fatwa  of a Companion is a proof ( hujjah ) which must be followed. Then argument is that following the
demise of the Prophet, the leadership of the Muslim community fell upon their shoulders, and a number
of learned Companions, with then intimate knowledge of the Qur'an and the teachings of the Prophet
were able to formulate fatwas  and issue decisions on a wide range of issues. The direct access to the
Prophet that the Companions enjoyed during his lifetime, and their knowledge of the problems and
circumstances surrounding the revelation of the Qur'an, known as the asbab al-nuzul , put them in a
unique position to formulate ijtihad  and to issue fatwas  on the problems that they encountered. Some
ulema and transmitters of Hadith have even equated the  fatwa of a Companion with the Sunnah  of the
Prophet The most learned Companions, especially the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs, are particularly
noted for their contributions and the impact they made to the determination of the detailed rules of fiqh
regarding the issues that confronted them.[1. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 94; Mahmassani, Falsafah , p.98; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 281. ] This is
perhaps attested by the fact that the views of the Companions were occasionally upheld and confirmed
by the Qur'an. Reference may be made in this context to the Qur'anic ayah  which was revealed
concerning the treatment that was to be accorded to the prisoners of war following the battle of Badr.
This ayah  (al-Anfal, 8:67 is known to have confirmed the view which `Umar b. al-Khattab had earlier
expressed on the issue.[2. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 136.] The question arises, nevertheless, as to whether the fatwa  of
a Companion should be regarded as a proof of Shari'ah or a mere ijtihad , which may or may not be
accepted by the subsequent generations of mujtahidun  and the rest of the community as a whole. No
uniform response has been given to this question, but before we attempt to explore the different
responses which the ulema have given, it will be useful to identify who exactly a Companion is.
According to the majority ( jumhur ) of ulema, anyone who met the Prophet, while believing in him,
even for a moment and died as a believer, is a Companion ( sahabi ) regardless of whether he or she
narrated any Hadith from the Prophet or not. Others have held that the very word sahabi , which derives
from suhbah , that is 'companionship', implies continuity of contact with the Prophet and narration of
Hadith from him. It is thus maintained that one or the other of these criteria, namely prolonged
company, or frequent narration of Hadith, must be fulfilled in order to qualify a person as a sahabi .[3.
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 70.] Some observers have made a reference to custom ( urf) in determining the duration of
contact with the Prophet which may qualify a Companion. This criterion would, in turn, overrule some
of the variant views to the effect that a sahabi  is a person who has kept the company of the Prophet for

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 211specified periods such as one or two years, or that he participated with the Prophet in at least one of the
battles.[4. Isma'il, Adillah , p. 282.] But notwithstanding the literal implications of the word sahabi , the majority
view is to be preferred, namely that continuity or duration of contact with the Prophet is not a
requirement. Some ulema have held that the encounter with the Prophet must have occurred at a time
when the person had attained the age of majority, but this too is a weak opinion as it would exclude
many who met the Prophet and narrated Hadith from him and attained majority only after his death.
Similarly, actual eye-witnessing is not required, as there were persons among the Companions like Ibn
Umm Maktum, who were blind but were still regarded as sahabi.
The fact of being a Companion may be established by means of continuous testimony, or tawatur ,
which is the case with regard to the most prominent Companions such as the Khulafa' Rashidun and
many others. To be a sahabi  may even be established by a reputation which falls short of amounting to
tawatur . Similarly, it may be established by the affirmation of another well-known Companion.
According to some ulema, including al-Baqillani, we may also accept the Companion's own affirmation
in evidence, as they are all deemed to be upright ('udul ), and this precludes the attribution of lying to
them. There is, however, a difference of opinion on this point. The preferred view is that reference
should be made to corroborating evidence, which may affirm or refute a person's claim concerning
himself. This precaution is taken with a view to preventing false allegations and the admittance of self-
styled individuals into the ranks of the Companions.[5. Shawkani, Irshad , p.71; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 283.]The saying of a Companion, referred to both as qawl al-sahabi , and fatwa al-sahabi , normally means an
opinion that the Companion had arrived at by way of  ijtihad . If may be a saying, a considered opinion
(fatwa ), or a judicial decision that the Companion had taken on a matter in the absence of a ruling in the
Qur'an, Sunnah  and ijma`. For in the face of a ruling in these sources, the fatwa of a Companion would
not be the first authority on that matter. If the fatwa  is related to the Qur'an and Sunnah, then it must be
on a point that is not self-evident in the source. There would, in other words, be a gap in our
understanding of the matter at issue had the Companion not expressed an opinion on it. [6. Cf. Isma'il, Adillah ,
pp. 284-85.]As stated earlier, there is no disagreement among the jurists that the saying of a Companion is a proof
which commands obedience when it is not opposed by other Companions. Rulings on which the
Companions are known to be in agreement are binding. An example of this is the grandmother's share
of one-sixth in inheritance on which the Companions have agreed, and it represents their authoritative
ijma`. The ulema are, however, in disagreement with regard to rulings which are based in opinion ( ra'y)
and ijtihad , and in regard to matters on which the Companions differed among themselves.[7. Khallaf, Ilm, p.
95.]There is general agreement among the ulema of usul on the point that the ruling of one Companion is
not a binding proof over another, regardless as to whether the ruling in question was issued by one of

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 212the caliphs, a judge, or a leading mujtahid among their number. For the Companions were themselves
allowed to disagree with one another in matters of ijtihad . Had the ruling of one Companion been a
proof over another, disagreement among them would not have been tolerated. But as already noted, the
ulema of usul have differed as to whether the ruling of a Companion constitutes a proof as regards the
Successors ( tabi`un ) and the succeeding generations of mujtahidun .[8. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 149; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 243.]There are three views on this, which may be summarised as follows:
1. That the fatwa of a Companion is a proof absolutely, and takes priority over qiyas  regardless of
whether it is in agreement with the qiyas  in question or otherwise. This is the view of Imam Malik, one
of the two views of Imam Shafi'i, one of the two views of Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal and of some Hanafi
jurists. The proponents of this view have referred to the Qur'anic text which provides in a reference to
the Companions: 'the first and foremost among the Emigrants and Helpers and those who followed
them in good deeds, God is well-pleased with them, as they are with Him' (al-Tawbah, 9:100). In this
text, God has praised 'those who followed the Companions'. It is suggested that this manner of praise
for those who followed the opinion and judgment of the Companions warrants the conclusion that
everyone should do the same . The fatwa of a sahabi , in other words, is a proof of Shari'ah . Another
Qur'anic ayah  which is quoted by the proponents of this view also occurs in the form of a
commendation, as it reads in an address to the Companions: 'You are the best community that has been
raised for mankind; you enjoin right and you forbid evil' (Al-`Imran, 3:109). Their active and rigorous
involvement in the propagation of Islam under the leadership of the Prophet is the main feature of the
amr bi'l-ma'ruf (enjoining right) which the Companions pursued. The Qur'an praises them as `the best
community' and as such their example commands authority and respect.[9. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 168; Zuhayr, Usul , IV,
192.]It has, however, been suggested that the Qur'anic references to the Companions are all in the plural,
which would imply that their individual views do not necessarily constitute a proof. But in response to
this, it is argued that the Shari'ah  establishes their uprightness ( 'adalah ) as individuals, and those who
follow them in good deeds have been praised because they followed their opinion and judgment both as
individuals and groups. It is further pointed out that those who followed the Companions are praised
because they followed the personal opinion of the Companions and not because the latter themselves
followed the Qur'an and Sunnah . For if this were to be the case, then the Qur'anic praise would be of no
special significance as it would apply to everyone who followed the Qur'an and Sunnah , whether a
Companion or otherwise. If there is any point, in other words, in praising those who followed the
Companions, then it must be because they followed the personal views of the Companions. It is thus
concluded that following the fatwa  of Companions is obligatory otherwise the Qur'an would not praise
those who followed it in such terms.[10. Isma'il, Adillah , pp. 291-92.]The proponents of this view have also referred to several ahadith , one of which provides; 'My
Companions are like stars; whoever you follow will lead you to the right path.'

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 213Another Hadith which is also quoted frequently in this context reads: 'Honour my Companions, for they
are the best among you, and then those who follow them and then the next generation, and then lying
will proliferate after that [. . .]' [11. Tabrizi, Mishkat , III, 1695, Hadith no. 6001 and 6003; Ghazali, Mustasfa,  I, 136; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 152. ]It is thus argued that according to these ahadith , following the way of the Companions is equated with
correct guidance, which would imply that their sayings, teachings and fatwas  constitute a proof that
commands adherence.
It is, however, contended that these ahadith  refer to the dignified status of the Companions in general,
and are not categorical to the effect that their decisions must be followed. In addition, since these
ahadith  are conveyed in absolute terms in that they identify all the Companions as a source of guidance,
it is possible that the Prophet had meant only those who transmitted the Hadith and disseminated the
Prophetic teachings, in which case the reference would be to the authority of the Prophet himself. The
Companions in this sense would be viewed as mere transmitters and propagators of the Sunnah  of the
Prophet.[12. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 192; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 287.]Furthermore, the foregoing references to the Companions, as al-Ghazali points out, are in the nature of
praise, which indicates their piety and propriety of conduct in the eyes of God, but does not render
adherence to their views an obligation. Al-Ghazali also quotes a number of other ahadith  in which the
Prophet praises individual Companions by name, all of which consist of commendation and praise; they
do not necessarily man that the saying of that Companion is a binding proof ( hujjah ).[13. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I,
136-37.]2. The second view is that the ijtihad  of a Companion is not a proof and does not bind the succeeding
generations of mujtahidun  or any one else. This view is held by the Ash'arites, the Mu`tazilah, Imam
Ahmad b. Hanbal (according to one of his two views), and the Hanafi jurist Abu al-Hasan al-Karkhi.[14.
Isma'il, Adillah , p. 294; Zuhayr, Usul, IV, 193.] The proponents of this view have quoted in support the Qur'anic ayah
(al-Hashr, 59:2) which provides: `Consider, O you who have vision.' It is argued that this ayah  makes
ijtihad  the obligation of everyone who is competent to exercise it, and makes no distinction over
whether the mujtahid  is a Companion or anyone else. What is obligatory is ijtihad  itself, not adhering to
the ijtihad  of anyone in particular. This ayah  also indicates that the mujtahid  must rely directly on the
sources and not imitate anyone, including the Companions. The proponents of this view also refer to the
ijma' of  the Companions, referred to above, to the effect that the views of one  mujtahid among them did
not bind the rest of the Companions.[15. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 135; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 149. ]Al-Ghazali and al-Amidi both consider this to be the preferred view, saying that those who have held
otherwise have resorted to evidence which is generally weak. Al-Shawkani has also held that the fatwa
of a Companion is not a proof, as he explains that the ummah  is required to follow the Qur'an and

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 214Sunnah . The Shari`ah only renders the Sunnah  of the Prophet binding on the believers, and no other
individual, whether a Companion or otherwise, has been accorded a status similar to that of the
Prophet.[16. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 214.] Abu Zahrah has, however, criticised al-Shawkani's conclusion, and
explains that when we say that the saying of a Companion is an authoritative proof, it does not mean
that we create a rival to the Prophet. On the contrary, the Companions were most diligent in observing
the Qur'an and Sunnah , and it is because of this and their closeness to the Prophet that their fatwa
carries greater authority than that of the generality of other mujtahidun .[17. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.172; Isma'il, Adillah , p.
299.]3. The third view, which is attributed to Abu Hanifah, is that the ruling of the Companion is a proof
when it is in conflict with qiyas  but not when it agrees with qiyas . The explanation for this is that when
the ruling of a sahabi conflicts with qiyas , it is usually for a reason, and the fact that the Companion has
given a ruling against it is an indication of the weakness of the qiyas ; hence the view of the Companion
is to be preferred. In the event where the ruling of the Companion agrees with qiyas , it merely concurs
with a proof on which the qiyas  is founded in the first place. The ruling of the Companion is therefore
not a separate authority.[18. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 194; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 301.]There is yet another view which maintains that only the rulings of the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs
command authority. This view quotes in support the Hadith in which the Prophet ordered the believers,
'You are to follow my Sunnah  and the Sunnah  of the Khulafa' Rashidun after me' This is even further
narrowed down, according to another Hadith, to include the first two caliphs only. The Hadith in
question reads: `Among those who succeed me, follow Abu Bakr and 'Umar'. The authenticity of this
second Hadith has, however, been called into question, and in any case, it is suggested that the purpose
of these ahadith is merely to praise the loyalty and devotion of these luminaries to Islam, and to
commend their excellence of conduct.[19. Ibn Majah, Sunan , I, 37, Hadith no. 97; Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 135; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 152. ]Imam Shafi'i is on record as having stated that he follows the fatwa  of a Companion in the absence of a
ruling in the Qur'an, Sunnah  and ijma' . Al-Shafi'i's view on this point is, however, somewhat
ambivalent, which is perhaps why it has been variously interpreted by the jurists. In a conversation with
al-Rabi', al-Shafi'i has stated: 'We find that the ulema have sometimes followed the fatwa  of a
Companion and have abandoned it at other times; and even those who have followed it are not
consistent in doing so.' At this point the interlocutor asks the Imam, 'What should I turn to, then?' To
this al-Shafi'i replies: 'I follow the ruling of the Companion when I find nothing in the Qur'an, Sunnah
or ijma' , or anything which carries through the implications of these sources.' Al-Shafi'i has further
stated that he prefers the rulings of the first three caliphs over those of the other Companions, but that
when the Companions are in disagreement, we should look into their reasons and also try to ascertain
the view which might have been adopted by the majority of the Companions. Furthermore, when the
ruling of the Companion is in agreement with qiyas , then that qiyas , according to al-Shafi`i, is given

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 215priority over a variant qiyas  which is not so supported.[20. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 261; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 243; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.
170.]Imam Abu Hanifah is also on record as having said, `When I find nothing in the Book of God and the
Sunnah  of the Prophet, I resort to the saying of the Companions. I may follow the ruling which appeals
to me and abandon that which does not, but I do not abandon their views altogether and do it not give
preference to others over them: It thus appears that Abu Hanifah would give priority to the ruling of a
Companion over qiyas , and although he does not consider it a binding proof, it is obvious that he
regards the fatwa of a sahabi to be preferable to the ijtihad of others.[21. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 170.]Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal has distinguished the fatwas  of Companions into two types, one being a fatwa
which is not opposed by any other Companion, or where no variant ijtihad  has been advanced on the
same point. Ibn Hanbal regards this variety of fatwa  as authoritative. An example of this is the
admissibility of the testimony of slaves, on which the Imam has followed the fatwa  of the Companion,
Anas b. Malik. Ibn Hanbal is quoted to the effect that he had not known of anyone who rejected the
testimony of a slave; it is therefore admissible. The second variety of fatwa  that Ibn Hanbal
distinguishes is one on which the Companions disagreed, and issued two or three different rulings
concerning the same problem. In this situation, Imam Ibn Hanbal considers them all to be valid and
equally authoritative, unless it is known that the Khulafa' Rashidun adopted one in preference to the
others, in which case the Imam would do likewise. An example of such disagreement is the case of the
allotment of a share in inheritance to germane brothers in the presence of the father's father. According
to Abut Bakr, the father's father in this case is accounted like the father who would in turn exclude the
germane brothers altogether. Zayd b. Thabit, on the other hand, counted the father's father as one of the
brothers and would give him a minimum of one-third, whereas `Ali b. Abi Talib counted the father's
father as one of the brothers whose entitlement must not be less than one-sixth. Imam Ibn Hanbal is
reported to have accepted all the three views as equally valid, for they each reflect the light and
guidance that their authors received from the Prophet, and they all merit priority over the ijtihad  of
others.[22. Abu Zahrah, Ibn Hanbal , p. 287; Isma'il, Adillah , pp. 295-96.]The Hanbali scholar Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah quotes Imam al-Shafi'i as having said, `It is better for us
to follow the ra'y of a Companion rather than our own opinion,' Ibn al-Qayyim accepts this without
reservation, and produces evidence in its support. He then continues to explain that the fatwa  of a
Companion may fall into any of six categories. Firstly, it may be based on what the Companion might
have heard from the Prophet. Ibn al-Qayyim explains that the Companions knew more about the
teachings of the Prophet than what has come down to us in the form of Hadith narrated by the
Companions. Note, for example, that Abu Bakr al-Siddiq transmitted no more than one hundred ahadith
from the Prophet notwithstanding the fact that he was deeply knowledgeable of the Sunnah  and was
closely associated with the Prophet not only after the Prophetic mission began, but even before.
Secondly, the fatwa  of a Companion may be based on what he might have heard from a fellow

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 216Companion, Thirdly, it may be based on his own understanding of the Qur'an in such a way that the
matter would not be obvious to us had the Companion not issued a fatwa  on it. Fourthly, the
Companion may have based his view on the collective agreement of the Companions, although we have
received it through one Companion only. Fifthly, the fatwa  of a Companion may be based on the
learned opinion and general knowledge that he acquired through long experience. And Sixthly, the
fatwa  of a Companion may be based on an understanding of his which is not a result of direct
observation but of information that he received indirectly, and it is possible that his opinion is incorrect,
in which case his fatwa  is not a proof and need not be followed by others.[23. Ibn Qayyim, I`lam , II, 191ff; Abu Zahrah,
Usul , pp. 169-70.]And lastly, it will be noted that Imam Malik has not only upheld the fatwas  of Companions but has
almost equated it with the Sunnah  of the Prophet. This is borne out by the fact, as already stated in our
discussion of the Sunnah , that in his Muwatta' , he has recorded over 1,700 ahadith , of which over half
are the sayings and fatwas  of Companions.
On a similar note, Abu Zahrah has reached the conclusion that the four Imams of Jurisprudence have
all, in principle, upheld and followed the fatwas  of Companions and all considered them to be
authoritative, although some of their followers have held views which differ with those of their leading
Imams. The author then quotes al-Shawkani at some length to the effect that the  fatwa of a Companion
is not a proof. Having quoted al-Shawkani, Abu Zahrah refutes his view by saying that it is 'not free of
exaggeration'. (We have already given a brief outline of Abu Zahrah's critique of al-Shawkani.) Abu
Zahrah then quotes Ibn al-Qayyim's view on this matter which we have already discussed, and supports
it to the effect that the fatwa  of a Companion is authoritative. But it is obvious from the tenor of his
discussion and the nature of the subject as a whole that the fatwa  of a Companion is a speculative proof
only.[24. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 172.] Although the leading Imams of jurisprudence are in agreement on the point
that the fatwa  of a Companion is authoritative, none has categorically stated that it is a binding proof.
Nonetheless, the four leading Imams consider the fatwa  of a Companion to be a persuasive source of
guidance in that it carries a measure of authority which merits careful consideration, and commands
priority over the ijtihad  of other mujtahidun.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 217Chapter Twelve: Istihsan , or Equity in Islamic LawThe title I have chosen for this chapter draws an obvious parallel between equity and istihsan which
should be explained, for although they bear a close similarity to one another, the two are not identical.
'Equity' is a Western legal concept which is grounded in the idea of fairness and conscience, and derives
legitimacy from a belief in natural rights or justice beyond positive law.[1. Osborn's Concise Law Dictionary , at p. 124,
defines equity as follows: 'Primarily fairness or natural justice. A fresh body of rules by the side of the original law, founded on distinct principles, and claiming to
supersede the law in virtue of a superior sanctity inherent in those principles. Equity is the body of rules formulated and administered by the Court of Chancery to
supplement the rules and procedure of the Common Law.'] Istihsan  in Islamic law, and equity in Western law, are both
inspired by the principle of fairness and conscience, and both authorise departure from a rule of positive
law when its enforcement leads to unfair results. The main difference between them is, however, to be
sought in the overall reliance of equity on the concept of natural law, and of istihsan  on the underlying
values and principles of the Shari'ah . But this difference need not be over-emphasised if one bears in
mind the convergence of values between the Shari`ah and natural law. Notwithstanding their different
approaches to the question of right and wrong, for example, the values upheld by natural law and the
divine law of Islam are substantially concurrent. Briefly, both assume that right and wrong are not a
matter of relative convenience for the individual, but derive from an eternally valid standard which is
ultimately independent of human cognizance and adherence. But natural law differs with the divine law
in its assumption that right and wrong are inherent in nature.[2. See for a discussion Kerr's Islamic Reform ,p.57.] From an
Islamic perspective, right and wrong are determined, not by reference to the 'nature of things', but
because God has determined them as such. The Shari'ah  is an embodiment of the will of God, the Lord
of the universe and the supreme arbiter of values. If equity is defined as a law of nature superior to all
other legal rules, written or otherwise, then this is obviously not what is meant by istihsan . For istihsan
does not recognise the superiority of any other law over the divine revelation, and the solutions which it
offers are for the most part based on principles which are upheld in the divine law. Unlike equity, which
is founded in the recognition of a superior law, istihsan  does not seek to constitute an independent
authority beyond the Shari'ah . Istihsan , in other words, is an integral part of the Shari'ah , and differs
with equity in that the latter recognises a natural law apart from, and essentially superior to, positive
law.[3. See for a discussion John Makdisi, 'Legal Logic,' p.9 0.]While discussing the general theory of istihsan , this chapter also draws attention to two main issues
concerning this subject. One of these is whether or not istihsan  is a form of analogical reasoning: is it to
be regarded as a variety of qiyas  or does it merit to stand as a principle of equity in its own right? The
other issue to be raised is the controversy over the validity of istihsan , which started with al-Shafi'i's
unambiguous rejection of this principle. A glance at the existing literature shows how the ulema are
preoccupied with the polemics over istihsan  and have differed on almost every aspect of the subject. I
shall therefore start with a general characterisation of istihsan , and then discuss the authority which is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 218quoted in its support. This will be followed by a brief account of the related concepts, ra'y and qiyas .
The discussion will end with an account of the controversy over istihsan  and a conclusion where I have
tried to see the issues in a fresh light with a view to developing a perspective on istihsan.
Istihsan  is an important branch of ijtihad , and has played a prominent role in the adaptation of Islamic
law to the changing needs of society. It has provided Islamic law with the necessary means with which
to encourage flexibility and growth. Notwithstanding a measure of juristic technicality which seems to
have been injected into an originally simple idea, istihsan  remains basically flexible, and can be used
for a variety of purposes, as will later be discussed. Yet because of its essential flexibility, the jurists
have discouraged an over-reliance on  istihsan lest it result in the suspension of the injunctions of the
Shari'ah  and become a means of circumventing its general principles. Istihsan  has thus become the
subject of much controversy among our jurists. Whereas the Hanafi, Maliki, and Hanbali jurists have
validated istihsan  as a subsidiary source of law, the Shafi'i, Zahiri and Shi'i ulema have rejected it
altogether and refused to give it any credence in their formulation of the legal theory of usul al-fiqh .[4. For
details see Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 119ff.]Istihsan  literally means `to approve, or to deem something preferable'. It is a derivation from hasuna ,
which means being good or beautiful. In its juristic sense, istihsan  is a method of exercising personal
opinion in order to avoid any rigidity and unfairness that might result from the literal enforcement of
the existing law. `Juristic preference' is a fitting description of istihsan,  as it involves setting aside as
established analogy in favour of an alternative ruling which serves the ideals of justice and public
interest in a better way.
Enforcing the existing law may prove to he detrimental in certain situations, and a departure from it
may be the only way of attaining a fair solution to a particular problem. The jurist who resorts to
istihsan  may find the law to be either too general, or too specific and inflexible. In both cases, istihsan
may offer a means of avoiding hardship and generating a solution which is harmonious with the higher
objectives of the Shari'ah .
It has been suggested that the ruling of the second caliph, `Umar b. al-Khattab, not to enforce the hadd
penalty of the amputation of the hand for theft during a widespread famine, and the ban which he
imposed on the sale of slave-mothers ( ummahat al-awlad ), and marriage with kitabiyahs  in certain
cases were all instances of istihsan .[5. Umm al-walad is a female slave who has borne a child to her master, and who is consequently free at his
death. A kitabiyah  is a woman who is a follower of a revealed religion, namely Christianity and Judaism.] For `Umar set aside the established
law in these cases on grounds of public interest, equity and justice.[6. Cf. Ahmad Hasan, Early Development , p.145.]The Hanafi jurist al-Sarakhsi (d. 483/1090), considers  istihsan to be a method of seeking facility and
ease in legal injunctions. It involves a departure from qiyas  in favour of a ruling which dispels hardship
and brings about ease to the people. 'Avoidance of hardship ( raf' al-haraj )' al-Sarakhsi adds, `is a

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 219cardinal principle of religion which is enunciated in the Qur'an, where we read, in an address to the
believers, that `God intends facility for you, and He does not want to put you in hardship' (al-Baqarah
2:185). Al-Sarakhsi substantiates this further by quoting the Hadith that reads: `The best of your
religion is that which brings ease to the people.' [7. Sarakhsi, Mabsut , X, 145; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad , V. 22.]Al-Khudari has rightly explained that in their search for solutions to problems, the Companions and
Successors resorted in the first place to the Qur'an and the normative example of the Prophet. But when
they found no answer in these sources, they exercised their personal opinion ( ra'y) which they
formulated in the light of the general principles and objectives of the Shari'ah . This is illustrated, for
example, in the judgment of `Umar ibn al-Khattab in the case of Muhammad ibn Salamah. The caliph
was approached by Ibn Salamah's neighbour who asked for permission to extend a water canal through
Ibn Salamah's property, and he was grafted the request on the ground that no harm was likely to accrue
to Ibn Salamah, whereas extending a water canal was to the manifest benefit of his neighbour. [8. Khudari,
Tarikh , p.199.]It thus appears that istihsan  is essentially a form of ra'y which gives preference to the best of the
various solutions that may exist for a particular problem. In this sense, istihsan  is an integral part of
Islamic jurisprudence and indeed of many other areas of human knowledge. Hence it is not surprising to
note Imam Malik's observation that ` istihsan represents nine-tenth of human knowledge'. While quoting
this view, Abu Zahrah adds that when Malik made this remark, he was apparently including the broad
concept of maslahah  within the purview of istihsan . `For it is maslahah  which accounts for the larger
part of the nine-tenth.[9. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 207, and 215. Imam Malik's characterisation of istihsan  also appears in Shatibi, Muwafaqat  (ed. Diraz),
IV. 208.]Evidence suggests that the Companions and Successors were not literalists who would seek a specific
authority in the revealed sources for every legal opinion ( fatwa ) they issued. On the contrary, their
rulings were often based on their understanding of the general spirit and purpose of the Shari'ah , and
not necessarily on the narrow and literal meaning of its principles. Istihsan  has been formulated in this
spirit; it is the antidote to literalism and takes a broad view of the law which must serve, not frustrate,
the ideals of fairness and justice.
To give an example, oral testimony is the standard form of evidence in Islamic law on which a
consensus ( ijma' ) can be claimed to exist. This normally requires two upright (` adl) witnesses unless the
law provides otherwise (the proof of zina, for instance, requires four witnesses). The number of
witnesses required in these cases is prescribed in the Qur'an, but the rule that testimony should be given
orally is determined by consensus. Muslim jurists have insisted on oral testimony and have given it
priority over other methods of proof, including confession and documentary evidence. In their view, the
direct and personal testimony of a witness who speaks before the judge with no intermediary is the most
reliable means of discovering the truth. The question arises, however, whether one should still insist on

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 220oral testimony at a time when other methods such as photography, sound recording, laboratory
analyses, etc. offer at least equally, if not more, reliable methods of establishing facts. Here we have, I
think, a case for a recourse to istihsan which would give preference to these new and often more
reliable means of proof. It would mean departing from the established rules of evidence in favour of an
alternative ruling which is justified in light of the new circumstances. The rationale of this istihsan
would be that the law requires evidence in order to establish the truth, and not the oral testimony for its
own sake. If this is the real spirit of the law, then recourse to istihsan would seem to offer a better way
to uphold that spirit.
The jurists are not in agreement on a precise definition for istihsan . The Hanafis have, on the whole,
adopted Abu'l-Hasan al-Karkhi's (d. 340/947) definition, which they consider accurate and
comprehensive. Istihsan  is accordingly a principle which authorises departure from an established
precedent in favour of a different ruling for a reason stronger than the one which is obtained in that
precedent. While quoting this, al-Sarakhsi adds that the precedent which is set aside by istihsan
normally consists of an established analogy which may be abandoned in favour of a superior proof, that
is, the Qur'an, the Sunnah , necessity ( darurah ), or a stronger qiyas .[10. Sarakhsi, Mabsut , X, 145.]The Hanbali definition of istihsan  also seeks to relate istihsan  closely to the Qur'an and the Sunnah .
Thus according to Ibn Taymiyyah, istihsan  is the abandonment of one legal norm ( hukm ) for another
which is considered better on the basis of the Qur'an, Sunnah , or consensus.[11. Ibn Taymiyyah, Mas'alah al-istihsan , p.
446.]Notwithstanding the fact that the Maliki jurists lay greater emphasis on istislah  (consideration of public
interest) and are not significantly concerned with istihsan , they have in principle validated istihsan . But
the Maliks view istihsan  as a broad doctrine, somewhat similar to istislah , which is less stringently
confined to the Qur'an and Sunnah than the Hanafis and Hanbalis have. Thus according to Ibn al-'Arabi,
'istihsan is to abandon exceptionally what is required by the law because applying the existing law
would lead to a departure from some of its own objectives.' Ibn al-'Arabi points out that the essence of
istihsan  is to act on 'the stronger of two indications ( dalilayn )'. Whereas the majority of ulema would
hold to qiyas  when it was attacked on grounds of rigidity, Malik and Abu Hanifah departed from qiyas ,
or specified the general in qiyas , on grounds of maslahah  and other indications.[12. 'Al-istihsan huwa tark muqtada
al-dalil `ala tariq al istithna' wa'l-tarakhkhus li-mu'aradah ma yu'arad bihi fi ba'd muqtadayatih.' See Ibn al-Arabi, Ahkam al-Qur'an , II, 57. A discussion of Ibn
al-'Arabi's definition also appears in Shatibi, Muwafaqat , (ed. Diraz), IV, 208. ]There are certain differences in the terms of these definitions which will hopefully become clearer as
our discussion proceeds. But it appears that departure from an existing precedent on grounds of more
compelling reasons is a feature of istihsan  which is common to all the foregoing definitions. According
to Abu Zahrah, the Hanafis have adopted al-Karkhi's definition, as it embraces the essence of istihsan  in
all of its various forms. The essence of istihsan , Abu Zahrah adds, is to formulate a decision which sets

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 221aside an established analogy for a reason that justifies such a departure and seeks to uphold a higher
value of the Shari'ah .[13. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 207.] The departure to an alternative ruling in istihsan may be from
an apparent analogy ( qiyas jali ) to a hidden analogy ( qiyas khafi ), or to a ruling which is given in the
nass (i.e. the Qur'an or the Sunnah ), consensus, custom, or public interest.
There is no direct authority for istihsan  either in the Qur'an or in the Sunnah , but the jurists have quoted
both in their arguments for it. The opponents of istihsan  have, on the other hand, argued that istihsan
amounts to a deviation from the principles of the Shari'ah. It is an idle exercise in human preferences
which only detracts from our duty to rely exclusively on divine revelation. Both sides have quoted the
Qur'an and the Sunnah  in support of their arguments. They were able to do so partly because the
Qur'anic ayat which they have quoted are on the whole open to various interpretation.
The Hanafi jurists have mainly quoted two Qur'anic ayahs , both of which employ a derivation of the
root word hasuna , and enjoin the believers to follow the best of what they hear and receive. They are as
follows:
1. And give good tidings to those of my servants who listen to the word and follow the best of it
[ahsanahu ]. Those are the ones God has guided and endowed with understanding (al-Zumar, 39:18);
2. And follow the best [ ahsan ] of what has been sent down to you from your Lord (al-Zumar, 39:55)
Qawl (lit.`word' or `speech') in the first ayah  could either mean the word of God, or any other speech. If
it means the former, which is more likely, then the question arises as to whether one should distinguish
between the words of God which are ahsan  (the best) as opposed to those which are merely hasan
(good). Some commentators have suggested that the reference here is to a higher course of conduct. The
Qur'an, in other words, distinguishes a superior course of conduct from that which may be considered as
ordinary. Punishing the wrong-doer, for example, is the normal course enjoined by the Shari'ah , but
forgiveness may at times be preferable ( ahsan ) and would thus represent the higher course of conduct.
The basic concept of istihsan , in other words, can be seen in the Qur'an, although not in its technical
form which the ulema of jurisprudence have developed.[14. Yusuf Ali's commentary to The Holy Qur'an , p.1241 at f.n. 4269.]The following two ahadith  have also been quoted in support of istihsan :
1. `What the Muslims deem to be good is good in the sight of God' [15. Amidi ( Ihkam , I, 241) considers this to be a Hadith
but it is more likely to be a  saying of the prominent companion, 'Abd Allah Ibn Mas'ud; see also Shatibi, I'tisam , II, 319.];
2. 'No harm shall be inflicted or reciprocated in Islam.' [16. Ibn Majah, Sunan , II, 784, Hadith no. 2340; Shatibi, Muwafaqat  (ed.
Diraz), III, 17, Khudari, Tarikh , p. 199.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 222The critics of istihsan  have argued, however, that none of the foregoing provide a definite authority in
support of this doctrine. Regarding the first of the two ayahs , for example, Amidi points out that it
merely praises those who follow the best of what they hear. There is no indication in this ayah  to render
adherence to the `best speech' an obligation. Nor does the second ayah bind one to a search for the best
in the revelation: if there is an injunction in the revealed sources, it would bind the individual regardless
of whether it is the best of the revelation or otherwise.[17. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, p. 159.] As for the Tradition, 'what
the Muslims deem good is good in the sight of God', both al-Ghazali and al-Amidi have observed that,
if anything, this would provide the authority for consensus ( ijma' ). There is nothing in this Tradition to
suggest, and indeed it would be arbitrary to say, that what a Muslim individual deems good is also good
in the sight of God.[18. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, p. 160; Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 138.]The critics of istihsan  have further suggested that this doctrine was initially introduced by Hanafi jurists
in response to certain urgent situations. The Hanafis then tried to justify themselves by quoting the
Qur'an and the Hadith ex-post facto . The Qur'anic foundation of istihsan , in other words, is weak, and
no explicit authority for it can be found in the Sunnah  either. [19. Ahmad Hasan, ` The Principle of Istihsan' , p. 347.]The historical origins of istihsan  are somewhat uncertain too. While Goldziher has suggested that Abu
Hanifah was the first to introduce and use the term in its juristic sense, Joseph Schacht has attributed the
origin of istihsan  to Abu Hanifah's disciple, Abu Yusuf. Fazlur Rahman has confirmed the former view,
which he thinks is substantiated by the fact that al-Shaybani, another disciple of Abu Hanifah, in a
number of cases attributed istihsan to Abu Hanifah himself.[20. Fazlur Rahman, Islamic Methodology , p.32.]Ra'y , Qiyas  and IstihsanIstihsan  is closely related to both ra'y and analogical reasoning. As already stated, istihsan  usually
involves a departure from qiyas  in the first place, and then the departure in question often means giving
preference to one qiyas  over another. Broadly speaking, qiyas  is the logical extension of an original
ruling of the Qur'an, the Sunnah  (or even ijma' ) to a similar case for which no direct ruling can be found
in these sources. Qiyas in this way extends the ratio legis of the divine revelation through the exercise
of human reasoning. There is, in other words, a rationalist component to qiyas , which consists, in the
most part, of a recourse to personal opinion ( ra'y). This is also true of istihsan , which relies even more
heavily on ra'y. It is this rationalist tendency verging on personal opinion in both qiyas  and istihsan
which has been the main target of criticism by al-Shafi'i and others. Hence the controversy over the
validity of istihsan is essentially similar to that encountered with regard to qiyas .[21. See further on qiyas  Kamali,
'Qiyas(Analogy)' in The Encyclopedia of Religion XII, 128ff. ] However, because of its closer identity with the Qur'an and the
Sunnah , qiyas  has gained wider acceptance as a principle of jurisprudence. But even so, qiyas  and

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 223istihsan  are both considered to be expressive of rationalist tendencies in a system of law which must
keep a close identity with its origins in divine revelation. In the centre of this controversy lies the
question of the validity or otherwise of recourse to personal opinion ( ra'y) in the development of the
Shari'ah .
From an historical vantage point, it will be noted that in their recourse to personal opinion, the
Companions were careful not to exercise ra'y at the expense of the Sunnah . This concern over possible
violation of the Sunnah  was greater in those days when the Hadith had not yet been compiled nor
consolidated. With the territorial expansion of the Islamic domain under the Umayyads, and the
dispersal of jurists and Companions who were learned in the Hadith, direct access to them became
increasingly difficult. Fear of isolating the Sunnah led the jurists to lay down certain rules which
restricted free recourse to ra'y. In order to be valid, the jurists ruled, ra'y must derive its authority from
the Shari'ah  principles which are enunciated in the Qur'an and the Sunnah . This was the genesis of
qiyas , which was initially a disciplined form of ra'y. However, the exercise of this relatively liberal
form of ra'y during the formative stages of jurisprudence had already led to considerable disagreement
among the fuqaha' . Those who called for a close adherence to the Hadith, namely the Ahl al-Hadith ,
mainly resided in the holy cities of Makkah and Madinah. The Ahl al-Hadith regarded the Sunnah  to be
supplementary to the Qur'an. They insisted on strict adherence to the Sunnah  which, in their view, was a
basic requirement of the faith. Acceptance of the faith, they argued, must be on a dogmatic basis
without referring to the rationale causes ( ta'lil) of its ordinances. They were, in other words, literalists
who denied the mujtahid the liberty to resort to the basic rationale of the Shari'ah  rules. Whenever they
failed to find an explicit authority in the sources concerning a problem, they chose to remain silent and
avoid recourse to ra'y. This they considered to be the essence of piety and unquestioning submission to
God.[22. Khudari, Tarikh , p. 200ff.]The fuqaha' of Iraq, on the other hand, resorted more liberally to personal opinion, which is why they
are known as Ahl al-Ra'y . In their view, the Shari'ah  was in harmony with the dictates of reason. Hence
they had little hesitation to refer, in their search for solutions to legal problems, both to the letter and the
spirit of the Shari'ah ordinances. The Ahl al-Ra'y are thus known for their frequent resort to analogical
reasoning and istihsan .
As will be shown in the following pages, istihsan  reflects an attempt on the part of the fuqaha at
regulating the free exercise of ra'y in matters of law and religion. Any restrictions imposed on istihsan ,
such as the one that sought to turn istihsan  into a technical formula, were basically designed to tilt the
balance in the continuous debate over the use of ra'y versus literalism in favour of the latter. Yet those
who saw istihsan  as a predominantly rationalist doctrine had reservations over subjecting it to
restrictions that eroded its rationalist content and rendered istihsan  a mere subdivision of qiyas .

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 224Although the classical theory of usul al-fiqh tacitly recognised that in some cases analogical reasoning
might entail injustice and that it was then permissible to resort to istihsan , this was, however, not to be
regarded as 'giving human reason a sovereign role'. Istihsan and maslahah were to be applied strictly in
the absence of a specific ruling in the Qur'an or the Sunnah .[23. Coulson, Conflicts , pp. 6-7. ]Qiyas Jali, Qiyas Khafi and IstihsanQiyas jali or 'obvious analogy', is a straightforward qiyas  which is easily intelligible to the mind. An
oft-quoted example of this is the analogy between wine and another intoxicant, say a herbal drink, both
of which have in common the effective cause ( 'illah ) of being intoxicating. Hence the prohibition
concerning wine is analogically extended to the intoxicant in question. But qiyas khafi , or 'hidden
analogy', is a more subtle form of analogy in the sense that it is not obvious to the naked eye but is
intelligible only through reflection and deeper thought. Qiyas khafi , which is also called istihsan  or
qiyas  mustahsan  (preferred qiyas ) is stronger and more effective in repelling hardship than qiyas jali ,
presumably because it is arrived at not through superficial observation of similitudes, but through
deeper reflection and analysis.
According to the majority of jurists, istihsan consists of a departure from qiyas jali to qiyas khafi . When
the jurist is faced with a problem for which no ruling can be found in the definitive text ( nass), he may
search for a precedent and try to find a solution by means of analogy. His search for alternatives may
reveal two different solutions, one of which is based on an obvious analogy and the other on a hidden
analogy. If there is a conflict between the two, then the former must be rejected in favour of the latter.
For the hidden analogy is considered to be more effective and therefore preferable to the obvious
analogy. This is one form of istihsan . But there is another type of istihsan  which mainly consists of
making an exception to a general rule of the existing law when the jurist is convinced that justice and
equity will be better served by making such an exception. The jurist might have reached this decision as
a result of his personal ijtihad , or the exception may have already been authorised by any of the
following: nass, ijma' , approved custom, necessity ( darurah ), or considerations of public interest
(maslahah ).[24. Sha`ban, Usul , p.100.] These will be illustrated in the examples that follow. The examples
chosen will also show more clearly the role that istihsan  has played in the development of fiqh.
1) To give an example of istihsan which consists of a departure from qiyas jali to qiyas khafi , it may be
noted that under Hanafi law, the waqf  (charitable endowment) of cultivated land includes the transfer of
all the ancillary rights (the so-called 'easements') which are attached to the property, such as the right of
water ( haqq al-shurb ), right of passage ( haqq al-murur ) and the right of flow ( haqq al-masil ), even if
these are not explicitly mentioned in the instrument of waqf. This ruling is based on qiyas khafi (or

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 225istihsan ), as I shall presently explain. It is a rule of the Islamic law of contract, including the contract of
sale, that the object of contract must be clearly identified in detail. What is not specified in the contract,
in other words, is not included therein. Now if we draw a direct analogy (i.e. qiyas jali ) between sale
and waqf - as both involve the transfer of ownership - we must conclude that the attached rights can
only be included in the waqf  if they are explicitly identified. It is, however, argued that such an analogy
would lead to inequitable results: the waqf  of cultivated lands, without its ancillary rights, would
frustrate the basic purpose of waqf , which is to facilitate the use of the property for charitable purposes.
To avoid hardship, a recourse to an alternative analogy, namely, to qiyas khafi , is therefore warranted.
The hidden analogy in this case is to draw a parallel, not with the contract of sale, bur with the contract
of lease ( ijarah ). For both of these involve a transfer of usufruct ( intifa' ). Since usufruct is the essential
purpose of ijarah , this contract is valid, on the authority of a Hadith, even without a clear reference to
the usufruct. This alternative analogy with ijarah  would enable us to say that waqf  can be validly
concluded even if it does not specify the attached rights to the property in detail.
To give another example, supposing A buys a house an a single transaction from Band C at a price of
40,000 pounds payable in installments. A pays the first installment of 2,000 pounds to B assuming that
B will hand over C's portion to him. But before this happens, B loses the 2,000 and the question arises
as to who should suffer the loss. By applying qiyas jali , B and C should share the loss. For B received
the money on behalf of the partnership and not for himself alone. Their position in sharing the loss, in
other words, is analogous to their status as partners in the first place. But by applying istihsan , only B,
who received the money, suffers the loss. For C, although a partner, was basically under no obligation
to obtain his portion of the 2,000 from B. It was only his right/privilege, and he would be at the liberty
to waive it. C's portion of the 2,000 pounds would consequently become a part of the remainder of the
price (or the debt) that A owed to both. Only B is therefore to suffer the loss. The solution is based on
the subtle analogy that one who is under no obligation should not have to pay any compensation
either.[25. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.82; al-Nabhani, Muqaddimah , p. 67.]2) The second variety of istihsan  consists of making an exception to a general rule of the existing law,
which is why some writers have called this type `exceptional istihsan' (istihsan istithna'i ), as opposed to
'analogical istihsan ' (istihsan qiyasi ) - the latter consisting of a departure from one qiyas to another.[26.
Note the use of these terms e.g., in Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 123.] Of these two, exceptional istihsan  is considered to be the
stronger, for it derives support from another recognised source, especially when this is the Qur'an or the
Sunnah . The scholars of various schools are generally in agreement on the validity of the istihsan  for
which authority can be found in the primary sources, but they have disputed istihsan  which is based on
qiyas khafi alone. In fact the whole controversy over istihsan  focuses on this latter form of istihsan .[27.
Thus the Maliki jurist Ibn al-Hajib classifies istihsan  into three categories of accepted ( maqbul ), rejected ( mardud ) and uncertain ( mutaraddid ), adding that istihsan
which is based on stronger grounds is acceptable to all. But istihsan  which can find no support in the nass, ijma' or qiyas  is generally disputed. See Ibn al-Hajib,
Mukhtasar , II, 485. ] But more to the point, the authority for an exceptional istihsan  may be given either in the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 226nass, or in one of the other recognised proofs, namely consensus ( ijma' ), necessity ( darurah ), custom (
`urf or `adah ), and public interest ( maslahah ). We shall illustrate each of these separately, as follows:
2.1. An example of the exceptional istihsan  which is based in the nass of the Qur'an is its ruling on
bequests to relatives: `It is prescribed that when death approaches any of you, if he leaves any assets,
that he makes a bequest to parents and relatives' (al-Baqarah 2:180).
This Qur'anic provision represents an exception to a general principle of the Shari'ah , namely that a
bequest is basically not valid: since bequest regulates the division of the estate after the death of the
testator, the latter is not allowed to accelerate this process. A bequest made during the lifetime of the
testator is thus tantamount to interference in the rights of the heirs after the testator's death, which is
unlawful. However, the Qur'an permits bequest as an exception to the general rule, that is by way of an
exceptional istihsan . It sets aside the general principle in favour of an exception which contemplates a
fair distribution of wealth in the family, especially in cases where a relative is destitute and yet is
excluded from inheritance in the presence of other heirs.[28. Cf. Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 123.]2.2. Exceptional istihsan  which is based on the Sunnah  may be illustrated with reference to the contract
of ijarah (lease or hire). According to a general rule of the Shari'ah  law of contract, an object which
does not exist at the time of contract may not be sold. However, ijarah  has been validated despite its
being the sale of the usufruct (i.e. in exchange for rent) which is usually non-existent at the moment the
contract is concluded. Analogy would thus invalidate ijarah , but istihsan  exceptionally validates it on
the authority of the Sunnah  (and ijma' ), proofs which are stronger than analogy and which justify a
departure from it.[29. Cf. Musa, Madkhal , p.197; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 82. For ahadith  which validate various types of  ijarah (land, labour, animals, etc.) see
Ibn Rushd, Bidayah , II, 220-221.]Similarly, the option of cancellation ( khabar al-shart ) represents an exceptional istihsan  which is
authorised by the Sunnah . It is employed when a person buys an object on condition that he may revoke
the contract within the next three days or so. This kind of stipulation amounts to a departure from the
general rule of the Shari'ah  law of contract, which is that a contract becomes binding upon its
conclusion. An exception to this rule has, however, been made, by way of istihsan , which is based on
the Hadith: `When you agree on the terms of a sale, you may say: it is not binding and I have an option
for three days.[30. Sahih al-Bukhari (trans. Khan), III, 575. Hadith no. 893; Sabuni, Madkhal , pp. 123-24.]2.3. To illustrate exceptional istihsan  which is authorised by ijma`, we may refer to istihsan `, or the
contract for manufacture of goods. Recourse to this form of istihsan  is made when someone places an
order with a craftsman for certain goods to be made at a price which is determined at the time of the
contract. Istihsan  validates this transaction despite the fact that the object of the contract is non-existent
at the time the order is placed. This form of istihsan  closely resembles the one which is authorised by
custom, as will later be discussed.[31. See Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 211.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 2272.4. An example of exceptional istihsan  which is based on necessity ( darurah ) is the method adopted
for the purification of polluted wells. If a well, or a pond for that matter, is contaminated by impure
substances, its water may not be used for ablution. It will be noted, however, that the water in the well
cannot be purified by removing that part which is impure-and it cannot be poured out either, for it is in
continuous contact with the water which flows into the well. The solution has been found through
istihsan , which provides that contaminated wells can be purified by removing a certain number, say a
hundred, buckets of water from the well (the exact number is determined with reference to the type and
intensity of pollution). Istihsan in this case is validated by reason of necessity and prevention of
hardship to the people.[32. See Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 211-12.]In a similar vein, strict analogy requires that witnesses, in order to be admissible, must in all cases be
`adl, that is, upright and irreproachable. For judicial decisions must be founded on truth, and this is
facilitated by the testimony of just witnesses. However if the qadi happens to be in a place where adl
witnesses cannot be found, then it is his duty, by virtue of istihsan , to admit witnesses who are nor
totally reliable so that the rights of the people may be protected.[33. Cf. Sabuni, Madkhal , p.124.] Similarly with
regard to the qadi the general rule requires that he be a mujtahid , but a non- mujtahid  may be appointed
as qadi where no mujtahid  can be found for this office.
2.5. To illustrate exceptional istihsan  which is authorised by custom, we may refer to the waqf  of
moveable goods. Since waqf , by definition, is the endowment of property on a permanent basis, and
moveable goods are subject to destruction and loss, they are therefore not to be assigned in waqf . This
general rule has, however, been set aside by the Hanafi jurists, who have validated the waqf  of
moveable such as books, tools and weapons on grounds of its acceptance by popular custom.[34. Cf. Sabuni,
Madkhal , p.124.] Similarly, a strict analogy would require that the object of sale be accurately defined and
quantified. However, popular custom has departed from this rule in the case of entry to public baths
where the users are charged a fixed price without any agreement on the amount of water they use or the
duration of their stay.[35. Shatibi, I'tisam , II, 318. ] Another example is bay' al-ta ati , or sale by way of `give and
take', where the general rule that offer and acceptance must be verbally expressed is not applied owing
to customary practice.
2.6. And finally, to illustrate istihsan  which is founded on considerations of public interest ( maslahah ),
we may refer to the responsibility of a trustee ( amin ) for the loss of goods which he receives in his
custody. The general rule here is that the trustee is not responsible for loss or damage to such property
unless it can be attributed to his personal fault or negligence ( taqsir ). Hence a tailor, a shoemaker or a
craftsman is not accountable for the loss of goods in his custody should they be stolen, or destroyed by
fire. But the jurists, including Abu Yusuf and al-Shaybani, have set aside the general rule in this case
and have held, by way of istihsan , the trustee to be responsible for such losses, unless the loss in
question is caused by a calamity, such as fire or flood, which is totally beyond his control. This istihsan

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 228has been justified on grounds of public interest so that trustees and tradesmen may exercise greater care
in safeguarding people's property.[36. Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 125.]The Hanafi - Shafi'i Controversy Over Istihsan
Al-Shafi`i has raised serious objections against istihsan , which he considers to be a form of pleasure-
seeking ( taladhdhudh wa-hawa ) and 'arbitrary law-making in religion'.[37. Shafi'i, Kitab al-Umm , 'Kitab Ibtal al-Istihsan',
VII, 271.] A Muslim must obey God and His Messenger at all times, and follow injunctions which are
enshrined in the clear texts ( nusus ). Should there arise any problem or difference of opinion, they must
be resolved with reference to the Qur'an and the Sunnah . In support of this, al-Shafi`i quotes the
Qur'anic nass in sura al-Nisa' (4:59): `Should you dispute over a matter among yourselves, refer it to
God and His Messenger, if you do believe in God and the Last Day.'
Al-Shafi`i continues on the same page: Anyone who rules or gives a fatwa  on the basis of a nass or on
the basis of ijtihad  which relies on an analogy to the nass has fulfilled his duty and has complied with
the command of the Lawgiver. But anyone who prefers that which neither God nor His Messenger has
commanded or approved, his preference will be acceptable neither to God nor to the Prophet. Istihsan
involves, according to al-Shafi'i, personal opinion, discretion and the inclination of the individual jurist,
an exercise which is not in harmony with the Qur'anic ayah which reads: 'Does man think that he will
be left without guidance [ an yutraka suda ]?' (al-Qiyamah, 75:36).
Commentators are in agreement that ' suda ' in this ayah  means a state of lawlessness in which the
individual is not subject to any rules, commands or prohibitions. With this meaning in mind, Imam
Shafi'i observes: if every judge and every mufti ruled according to their own inclinations, one can
imagine that self-indulgence and chaos would afflict the life of the community. Unlike qiyas , whose
propriety can be tested by the methodology to which it must conform, istihsan  is not regulated as such.
Since istihsan  consists neither of nass nor of an analogy to nass, it is ultra vires and must therefore be
avoided.[38. Shafi'i, Kitab al-Umm , 'Kitab Ibtal al-Istihsan', VII, 272.]In response to this critique, the Hanafis have asserted that istihsan  is not an arbitrary exercise in
personal preference. It is a form of qiyas  (viz., qiyas khafi ), and is no less authoritative than qiyas . Thus
it is implied that, contrary to allegations by the Shafi`i jurists, istihsan  is not an independent source of
law, but a branch of qiyas  which has a firm grounding in the Shari'ah . If this argument is accepted, it
would imply that istihsan  must be subjected to the same rules which are applicable to qiyas , and would
therefore lose its status as a juristic principle in its own right. The scope and flexibility of istihsan
would consequently be restricted as it would mean changing istihsan  from a predominantly equitable
doctrine into a form of analogical reasoning. This would confine istihsan  only to matters on which a
parallel ruling could be found in the primary sources. Having said this, however, it is doubtful whether
istihsan  is really just another form of qiyas .

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 229Ahmad Hasan has observed that istihsan is more general than qiyas khafi , as the former embraces a
wider scope and can apply to matters beyond the confines of the latter.[39. Ahmad Hasan, ' The Principle of Istihsan ',
p.352.] Aghnides has similarly held that istihsan  is a new principle which goes beyond the scope of qiyas ,
whether or not this is openly admitted to be the case:
Abu Hanifah and his earliest disciples did not consider istihsan  as a kind of qiyas [...] nor did he use the
word in any technical sense. Had that been the case, like so many of his views, it would probably have
been placed on record. The fact is that he used the word istihsan  in its usual meaning, namely, that of
abandoning qiyas  for an opinion thought to be more subservient to the social interest. [40. Aghnides,
Muhammedan Theories , p.73.]Aghnides goes on to suggest that when the Shafi'i jurists attacked istihsan  on the grounds that it meant a
setting aside of the revealed texts, the disciples of Abu Hanifah felt themselves forced to show that such
was not the case. Hence they put forward the contention that istihsan  was nothing but another kind of
qiyas . According to another observer, the attempt to bring istihsan  within the sphere of qiyas  is
unjustified. For `it really lies outside of this narrow sphere and must therefore be recognised as a special
form of deduction'. [41. Paret, 'Istihsan and Istislah', Encyclopedia of Islam , new ed., IV, 256. ]Al-Ghazali has criticized istihsan  on different grounds. He has observed that the jurists of the Shafi`i
school have recognised the validity of istihsan which is based on an indication ( dalil) from the Qur'an
or Sunnah . When there exists a dalil of this kind, then the case at hand would be governed not by
istihsan  but directly by the provision of the Qur'an or Sunnah  itself.[42 . Ghazali, Mustasfa , I. 137.] Furthermore al-
Ghazali is critical of Abu Hanifah for his departure, in a number of cases, from a sound Hadith in
favour of qiyas  or istihsan .[43. Ghazali criticises Abu Hanifah's ruling, for example, with regard to implementing the punishment of zina on the
testimony of four witnesses each of whom point at a different corner of the room where zina is alleged to have taken place. This is a case, according to Ghazali, of
doubt ( shubha ) in the proof of zina which would prevent the enforcement of the  hadd penalty. For according to a Hadith, hudud  are to be dropped in all cases of
doubt. Abu Hanifah's ruling is based on istihsan , apparently on the grounds that disbelieving the Muslims ( takdhib al-muslimin ) is reprehensible. Ghazali regards
Abu Hanifah's ruling as whimsical and a form of istihsan which should not be followed ( Mustasfa , I, 139).] And finally, al-Ghazali rejects
istihsan  which is based on popular custom, for custom by itself is not a source of law. He observes that
approved customs are often justified with reference, not to istihsan , but to other proofs. While referring
to the example of entry to a public bath for a fixed price without quantifying the consumption of water,
al-Ghazali asks: `How is it known that the community adopted this practice by virtue of istihsan ? Is it
not true that this was the custom during the time of the Prophet, in which case it becomes a tacitly
approved Sunnah (Sunnah taqririyyah ) so as to prevent hardship to the people?' [44. Mustasfa , II, 138.]Another Shafi'i jurist, al-Amidi, has stated that notwithstanding his explicit denunciation of istihsan , al-
Shafi`i himself resorted to istihsan . Al-Shafi'i has been quoted to have used a derivation of istihsan  on
several occasions including the ruling in which he said, 'I approve ( astahsinu ) mut'ah  (gift of

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 230consolation) at the level of 30 dirhams'; and `I approve ( astahsinu ) the proof of pre-emption ( shuf`) to
be three days' (following the date when the sale of the property in question came to the knowledge of
the claimant). Al-Amidi thus draws the conclusion that `there is no disagreement on the essence of
istihsan  between the two schools,' [45. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 157.] which obviously means that their differences
amount to no more than splitting hairs over words.
The Maliki jurist al-Shatibi has held that istihsan  does not mean the pursuit of one's desires; on the
contrary, a jurist who understands istihsan  has a profound understanding of the intention of the
Lawgiver. When the jurist discovers that a strict application of analogy to a new problem leads to loss
of maslahah  and possibly to an evil ( mafsadah ) then he must set aside qiyas  and resort to istihsan .[46.
Shatibi, Muwafaqat  (ed. Diraz), IV, 206. ]While discussing the controversy over  istihsan , another observer, Shaykh al-Khudari, writes that
anyone who is familiar with the works of the ulema of jurisprudence would agree that Abu Hanifah and
his disciples are not alone in their reliance on istihsan . All jurists have resorted to istihsan  in one form
or another, and a reader of the various juristic schools of thought is bound to come across opinions
which are founded in it.[47. Khudari, Tarikh , p.201.]This view finds further support from Yusuf Musa, who has tersely observed that juristic differences
over istihsan  essentially amount to no more than arguments over words. For the fuqaha' of every major
school have invariably resorted to istihsan  in one form or another.[48. Musa, Madkhal , p.198.]If this is accepted, then one naturally wonders as to the causes that might explain the controversy in
question. Al-Taftazani has observed that neither of the two sides of the controversy over istihsan  have
understood one another, and that the whole debate is due to a misunderstanding. Those who argue in
favour of istihsan  have perceived this principle differently to those who have argued against it. Had
istihsan  been properly understood, al-Taftazani adds, its basic validity would never have been
disputed.[49. Taftazani, Talwih , p. 82. It is not certain whether Taftazani was a Hanafi or a Shafi'i. In a bibliographical note on Taftazani, it is stated that he is
sometimes considered a Hanafi and sometimes a Shafi'i. See al-Mawsu`ah al-Fiqhiyyah , I, 344.]Al-Taftazani's assessment has been widely endorsed by modern writers on the subject, including
Khallaf, Abu Zahrah and Yusuf Musa. In Khallaf's opinion, the essential validity of istihsan  is
undeniable, for it enables a departure from the apparent or the general rule of law to a variant ruling
which warrants such a departure. Every judge and jurist must consider the circumstances of an
individual case, and occasionally decide not to apply a certain rule, or to make an exception, as he
considers this to be required by maslahah  and justice.[50. Khallaf, `Ilm, p. 83; Musa, Madkhal , p.197.] And lastly, Abu
Zahrah observes that, 'One exception apart, none of al-Shafi'is criticisms are relevant to the Hanafi
conception of istihsan '. The one exception that may bear out some of al-Shafi'i's criticisms is istihsan

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 231which is authorised by custom. For custom is not a recognised source of law and is, in any case, not
sufficiently authoritative to warrant a departure from qiyas .[51. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 215.]Conclusion
The attempt at linking istihsan  with qiyas  has involved tortuous reasoning which somehow remains less
than convincing. One way to resolve some of the juristic differences on this issue may be to go back to
the origin of istihsan  and recapture the meaning that was given to it by Abu Hanifah and the early
ulema of jurisprudence. On this point there is evidence to suggest that Abu- Hanifah (d. 150/767) did
not conceive of istihsan  as an analogical form of reasoning. About half a century later, when al-Shafi`i
wrote his Risalah  and Kitab al-Umm , there was still little sign of a link between istihsan  and qiyas . Al-
Shafi'i is, in fact, completely silent on this point. Had al-Shafi'i (d.204/820) known that istihsan  was a
variety of qiyas , one can imagine that he might have softened his stand with regard to it. Originally
istihsan  was conceived in a wider and relatively simple form which was close to its literal meaning and
free of the complexities that were subsequently woven into it. One is here reminded of Imam Malik's
characteristic statement which designates istihsan  as nine-tenth of human knowledge, a statement which
grasps the true essence of istihsan as a method of finding better and more equitable alternatives to
existing problems both within and beyond the confines of analogical reasoning. Istihsan  is basically
antithetic to qiyas  and not a part of it. It enables the jurist to escape from strict conformity to the rules of
qiyas  when such conformity is likely to lead to unfair results. Istihsan  was originally formulated, not as
another variety of qiyas , but as a doctrine which liberated the jurist from the strait-jacket of qiyas ,
especially where conformity to qiyas  clashed with the higher objectives of the Shari'ah .
It is well to remember that much of the juristic controversy over istihsan  has developed under the
pressure of conformity to the strict requirements of the legal theory once it was finally formulated by al-
Shafi`i and gradually accepted by others. The thrust of al-Shafi'i's effort in formulating the legal theory
of the usul was to define the role of reason vis-à-vis the revelation. Al-Shafi'i confined the scope of
human reasoning in law to analogy alone. In his well-known statement concerning ijtihad  and qiyas ,
especially where he considered the two to be synonymous, one hardly fails to notice the attempt at
confining the use of human reasoning to qiyas  alone:
On all matters touching the life of a Muslim there is either a binding decision or an indication as to the
right answer. If there is a decision, it should be followed; if there is no indication as to the right answer,
it should be sought by ijtihad , and ijtihad  is qiyas . [52. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 206. ]In this statement, al-Shafi`i reflected the dominant mood of his time. From that point onward, any
injection of rationalist principles into the legal theory of the usul had to seek justification through qiyas ,
which was the only channel through which a measure of support could be obtained for istihsan . In order

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 232to justify  istihsan within the confines of the legal theory, it was initially equated with qiyas  and
eventually came to be designated as a sub-division of it.
The next issue over which the fuqaha' have disagreed is whether an  istihsan which is founded in the
Qur'an, Sunnah , or ijma` should be called istihsan  at all. In cases where a Hadith authorises departure
from an existing analogy in favour of an alternative ruling, then all that one needs to authorise the
departure in question is the Hadith itself. It would therefore seem redundant to apply the word istihsan
to this form of departure from the rules of qiyas . Whenever a ruling can be found to the Qur'an (or the
Sunnah ), the jurist is obliged to follow it and should, basically, have no choice of resorting to qiyas  or
to istihsan . If the Qur'an provides the choice of an alternative ruling which seems preferable, then the
alternative in question is still a Qur'anic rule, not istihsan .
It would appear that the fuqaha' initially used the term istihsan  close to its literal sense, which is to
`prefer' or to deem something preferable. The literal meaning of istihsan was naturally free of the
restrictions which were later evolved by the fuqaha' . A measure of confusion between the literal and
technical meanings of istihsan  probably existed ever since it acquired a technical meaning in the usage
of the jurists. This distinction between the literal and juristic meanings of istihsan  might help explain
why some ulema have applied istihsan  to the rulings of the Qur'an, the Sunnah , and ijma' . When we say
that the Qur'an, by way of istihsan , permitted bequests to be made during the lifetime of the testator, we
are surely not using istihsan  in its technical/juristic sense - that is, giving preference to one qiyas  over
another or making an exception to an existing legal norm - but merely saying that the Qur'an preferred
one of the two conceivable solutions in that particular case. When the Qur'an authorises bequests, then
one might say that it has established a legal norm in its own right regardless as to whether it can be
described as an exception to another norm or not. To regard this Qur'anic ruling as an istihsan can only
be true if istihsan  is used in its literal sense. For as a principle of jurisprudence, istihsan  can add nothing
to the authority of the Qur'an and the Sunnah . Although one might be able to find the genesis of istihsan
in the Qur'an, this would have nothing to do with the notion of constructing istihsan  as an alternative to,
or a technique of escape from, qiyas . Furthermore, to read istihsan into the lines of the Qur'an would
seem superfluous in the face of the legal theory of the usul that there is no room for rationalist doctrines
such as istihsan  in the event that a ruling can be found in the nusus .
Notwithstanding the fact that many observers have considered Abu'l-Hasan al-Karkhi's definition to be
the most acceptable, my enquiry leads to the conclusion that the Maliki approach to istihsan  and Ibn al-
`Arabi's definition of it, is wider in scope and probably closest to the original conception of istihsan , for
it does not seek to establish a link between istihsan  and qiyas .
Istihsan  has undoubtedly played a significant role in the development of Islamic law, a role which is
sometimes ranked even higher than that of qiyas . Notwithstanding a measure of reticence on the part of
the ulema to highlight the role of istihsan , it in reality features most prominently in bridging the gap

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 233between law and social realities by enabling the jurist to pay individual attention to circumstances and
the peculiarities of particular problems. But for reasons which have already been explained, the fuqaha'
have exercised restraint in the use of istihsan , which, as a result, has not been utilised to the maximum
of its potential. Hence, it is not surprising to note that a certain gap between theory and practice has
developed in Islamic Law.[53. Joseph Schacht has devoted a chapter to the subject, entitled `Theory and Practice' where he elaborates on how the
gap between the law and social realities has widened: An Introduction , pp.76-86. ] The potentials of istihsan  could hardly be
translated into reality unless istihsan  is stripped of its unwarranted accretions. The only consideration
that needs to be closely observed in istihsan  is whether there exists a more compelling reason to warrant
a departure from an existing law. The reason which justifies resort to istihsan  must not only be valid in
Shari`ah but must serve a higher objective of it and must therefore be given preference over the existing
law which is deemed unfair. Since istihsan  enables a choice between alternative solutions, it
contemplates the relative merits and demerits of each of the alternatives. The existing law is always the
base to which an alternative is devised through istihsan . In this sense, istihsan  offers considerable
potential for innovation and for imaginative solutions to legal problems. The question in istihsan  is not
merely to find a solution to a particular problem but to find a better solution to the one which already
exists. It therefore calls for a higher level of analysis and refinement which must in essence transcend
the existing law and analogy.
The potential for new alternatives in istihsan  would thus be considerably restricted if it were to be
subjected to the requirements of qiyas . The two are essentially designed for different purposes and each
must be allowed to function in its best capacity. Analogy essentially extends the logic of the Qur'an and
the Sunnah , whereas istihsan  is designed to tackle the irregularities of qiyas . Thus it would seem
methodologically incorrect to amalgamate the two into a single formula.
Istihsan  has admittedly not played a noticeable role in the legal and judicial practices of our times. It
has, as it were, remained in the realm of controversy, which may partly be explained by the dominance
of the phenomenon of taqlid  in shaping the attitude of lawyers and judges towards istihsan . Only the
rulings of the jurists of the past have been upheld on  istihsan , and even this has not been totally free of
hesitation. Muslim rulers and judges have made little or no use of istihsan either in developing the
existing law or in the day-to-day administration of justice. This is patently unjustified, especially in
view of the eminent suitability of istihsan  in the search for fair and equitable solutions.
Istihsan  can best be used as a method by which to improve the existing law, to strip it of impractical
and undesirable elements and to refine it by means of making necessary exceptions. Istihsan , in other
words, generally operates within the confines of the legal status quo  and does not seek a radical change
in the existing law, although it has considerable potential to effect innovation and refinement.
Judges and lawyers are generally reluctant to depart from the existing law, or to make exceptions to it,
even in the face of evidence to the effect that a departure would be in the interests of fairness and

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 234justice. Their reluctance is often due to the reticence in the law as to precisely what role the judge has to
play in such a situation. Judges are normally expected to enforce the law at all costs, and often have
little choice in the matter regardless of the circumstances or results. Alternatively, it may be that the
judges are, in fact, doing this- departing from the law when it seems patently unfair - without openly
acknowledging what they are doing. In any case, it world seem advisable if the legislature explicitly
authorised the judge to resort to istihsan  when he considers this to be the only way of achieving a fair
solution in a case under consideration. In this way, istihsan  would hopefully find a place in the day-to-
day administration of justice and would consequently encourage flexibility and fairness in law and
judicial practice. Judicial decisions would, in turn, influence legislation and contribute towards attaining
a more refined and equitable legal order. A clear and well-defined role for istihsan would hopefully
mark a new opening in the evolutionary process of Islamic law.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 235Chapter Thirteen: Maslahah Mursalah (Considerations of Public Interest)Literally, maslahah  means 'benefit' or `interest'. When it is qualified as maslahah  mursalah , however, it
refers to unrestricted public interest in the sense of its not having been regulated by the Law giver
insofar as no textual authority can be found on its validity or otherwise.[1. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 84; Badran Usul , p. 209.] It
is synonymous with istislah , and is occasionally referred to as maslahah mutlaqah on account of its
being undefined by the established rules of the Shari'ah . For al-Ghazali, maslahah  consists of
considerations which secure a benefit or prevent a harm but which are, simultaneously, harmonious
with the objectives ( maqasid ) of the Shari'ah . These objectives, the same author adds, consist of
protecting the five `essential values', namely religion, life, intellect, lineage and property. Any measure
which secures these values falls within the scope of maslahah , and anything which violates them is
mafsadah  (`evil'), and preventing the latter is also maslahah .[2. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 139-140.] More technically,
maslahah mursalah is defined as a consideration which is proper and harmonious ( wasf munasib
mula'im ) with the objectives of the Lawgiver; it secures a benefit or prevents a harm; and the Shari'ah
provides no indication as to its validity or otherwise.[3. Badran, Usul , p. 210; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 131.] The Companions,
for example, decided to issue currency, to establish prisons, and to impose tax ( kharaj ) on agricultural
lands in the conquered territories despite the fact that no textual authority could be found in favour of
this. [4. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 84.]The ulema are in agreement that istislah  is not a proof in respect of devotional matters (` ibadat ) and the
specific injunctions of the Shari'ah  (muqaddarat ). Thus the nusus  regarding the prescribed penalties
(hudud ) and penances ( kaffarat ), the fixed entitlements in inheritance ( fara'id ), the specified periods of
`iddah which the divorced women must observe, and such other ahkam  which are clear and decisive fall
outside the scope of istislah . Since the precise values and causes of ` ibadat  cannot be ascertained by the
human intellect, ijtihad , be it in the form of istislah , jurist, preference ( istihsan ) or qiyas , does not apply
to them. Furthermore, with regard to 'ibadat and other clear injunctions, the believer is duty-bound to
follow them as they are. But outside these areas, the majority of ulema have validated reliance on
istislah  as a proof of Shari'ah  in its own right.[5. Badran, Usul , p. 210; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 134.]Istislah  derives its validity from the norm that the basic purpose of legislation ( tashri `) in Islam is to
secure the welfare of the people by promoting their benefit or by protecting them against harm. The
ways and means which bring benefit to the people are virtually endless. The masalih  (pl. of maslahah ),
in other words, can neither be enumerated nor predicted in advance as they change according to time
and circumstance.[6. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , II, 2-3; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 134.] To enact a law may be beneficial at one time
and harmful at another; and even at one and the same time, it may be beneficial under certain
conditions, but prove to be harmful in other circumstances. The ruler and the mujtahid  must therefore

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 236be able to act in pursuit of the masalih  as and when these present themselves.[7. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 84; Badran, Usul , p.
211.]The majority of ulema maintain that istislah  is a proper ground for legislation. When the maslahah  is
identified and the mujtahid  does not find an explicit ruling in the nusus , he must act in its pursuit by
taking the necessary steps to secure it. This is justified by saying that God's purpose in revealing the
Shari'ah  is to promote man's welfare and to prevent corruption in the earth. This is, as al-Shatibi points
out, the purport of the Qur'anic ayah in Sura al-Anbiya' (21:107) where the purpose of the Prophethood
of Muhammad is described in the following terms: `We have not sent you but as a mercy for all
creatures.' In another passage, the Qur'an describes itself, saying: `O mankind, a direction has come to
you from your Lord, a healing for the ailments in your hearts [...]' (Yunus, 10:75). The message here
transcends all barriers that divide humanity; none must stand in the way of seeking mercy and
beneficence for human beings. Elsewhere, God describes His purpose in the revelation of religion,
saying that it is not within His intentions to make religion a means of imposing hardship (al-Hajj,
22:78). This is confirmed elsewhere in sura al-Ma'idah (5:6) where we read, in more general terms, that
`God never intends to impose hardship upon people.'[8. Cf. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , II, 3; Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 25. ]These are some of the Qur'anic objectives which grasp the essence of maslahah ; they are permanent in
character and would be frustrated if they were to be subjected to the kind of restrictions that the
opponents of maslahah  have proposed. We shall discuss the views of the opponents of maslahah  in
fuller detail; suffice it here to point out that the argument they have advanced amounts to a proposition
that the general objectives of the Qur'an can only be implemented, in regard to particular cases, if there
is another nass available in their support. This would seem to amount to an unwarranted restriction on
the general objectives of the Lawgiver as these are expounded in the Qur'an.
The ulema have quoted a number of ahadith which authorise acting upon maslahah , although none is in
the nature of a clear nass on the subject. Particular attention is given, in this context, to the Hadith
which provides that `No harm shall be inflicted or reciprocated to Islam'.[9. Ibn Majah, Sunan , Hadith no 2340.]The substance of this Hadith is upheld in a number of other ahadith , and it is argued that this Hadith
encompasses the essence of maslahah  in all of its varieties.[10. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.90; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 222. ] Najm al-
Din al-Tufi, a Hanbali jurist (d. 716 A.H.), has gone so far as to maintain, as we shall further elaborate,
that this Hadith provides a decisive nass on istislah . The widow of the Prophet, A'ishah, is reported to
have said that "the Prophet only chose the easier of two alternatives, so long as it did not amount to a
sin'.[11. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p.412, Hadith no. 1546.]According to another Hadith, the prophet is reported to have said that 'Muslims are bound by their
stipulations unless it be a condition which turns a haram into halal  or a halal into a haram .' [12. Abu Dawud,
Sunan  ( Hasan's trans.), III, 1020, Hadith no 3587.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 237This would seem to be granting Muslims the liberty to pursue their benefits and to commit themselves
to that effect provided that this does not amount to a violation of the explicit commands and
prohibitions of the Shari'ah . In yet another Hadith, the Prophet is quoted to have said: 'God loves to see
that His concessions ( rukhas ) are observed, just as He loves to see that His strict laws ( aza'im ) are
observed.' [13. Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , II, 242; Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 120.] 'this would confirm the doctrine that no
unnecessary rigour in the enforcement of the ahkam  is recommended, and that the Muslims should avail
themselves of the flexibility and concessions that the Lawgiver has granted them and utilise them in
pursuit of their masalih . The rigorous approach that the Zahiri ulema have taken in regard to maslahah ,
as will later be discussed, tends to oppose the purport of this Hadith.
Technically, however, the concept of maslahah mursalah does not apply to the rulings of the Prophet.
When there is a Prophetic ruling in favour of a maslahah , it becomes part of the established law, and
hence no longer a maslahah mursalah . Historically, the notion of maslahah mursalah originated in the
practice of the Companions. This is, of course, not to say that the Prophet did not rule in favour of
maslahah , but merely to point out that as a principle of jurisprudence, maslahah mursalah does not
apply to the rulings of the Sunnah .
The practice of the Companions, the Successors and the leading mujtahidun  of the past tends to suggest
that they enacted laws and took measures in pursuance of maslahah  despite the lack of textual authority
to validate it. The Caliph Abu Bakr, for example, collected and compiled the scattered records of the
Qur'an in a single volume; he also waged war on those who refused to pay the zakah ; and he nominated
`Umar to succeed him.[14. Shatibi, I`tisam , II, 287; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.86.] Similarly, `Umar b. al-Khattab held his officials
accountable for the wealth they had accumulated in abuse of public office and expropriated such
wealth. He also poured away milk to which water had been added as a punishment to deter dishonesty
in trade. Furthermore, `Umar b. al-Khattab suspended the execution of the prescribed punishment for
theft in a year of famine, and approved of the views of the Companions to execute a group of criminals
for the murder of one person.[15. Ibn al-Qayyim, I`lam , I, 185; Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 222-223; Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 52.] These
decisions were taken despite the clear ruling of the Qur'an concerning retaliation ( qisas ), which is `life
for life' and the Qur'anic text on the amputation of the hand, which is not qualified in any way
whatsoever. But the Caliph Umar's decision concerning qisas  was based on the rationale that the lives
of the people would be exposed to aggression if participants in murder were exempted from qisas .
Public interest thus dictated the application of qisas  for all who took part in murdering a single
individual. Furthermore, the third Caliph, `Uthman, distributed the authenticated Qur'an and destroyed
all the variant versions of the text. He also validated the right to inheritance of a woman whose husband
had divorced her in order to be disinherited. The fourth Caliph, `Ali, is also on record as having held
craftsmen and traders responsible for the loss of goods that were placed in then custody. this he
considered to be for the maslahah  of the people so that traders should take greater care in safeguarding
people's property.[16. Shatibi, I'tisam , II, 292, 302; Ibn al-Qayyim, I`lam , I, 182; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 223.] In a similar vein, the ulema

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 238of the various schools have validated the interdiction of the ignorant physician, the clowning mufti , and
the bankrupt trickster, on grounds of preventing harm to the people. The Malikis have also authorised
detention and ta`zir for want of evidence of a person who is accused of a crime.[17. Shatibi, I`tisam , II, 293. Khallaf,
`Ilm, p.86, Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 223.] In all these instances, the ulema have aimed at securing the maslahah mursalah
by following a Shari'ah -oriented policy ( siyasah shar'iyyah ), which is largely concurrent with the
dictates of maslahah . As Ibn al-Qayyim has observed, ' siyasah shar'iyyah comprises all measures that
bring the people close to well-being ( salah ) and move them further away from corruption ( fasad ), even
if no authority is found for them in divine revelation and the Sunnah of the Prophet.' [18. Ibn al-Qayyim, Turuq , p.
16.]The main support for istislah  as a proof and basis of legislation ( tashri ) comes from Imam Malik, who
has given the following reasons in its favour:
1. The Companions have validated it and have formulated the rules of Shari'ah  on its basis.
 
2. 
3. When the maslahah  is compatible with the objectives of the Lawgiver ( maqasid al-shari `) or
falls within the genus or category of what the Lawgiver has expressly validated, it must be
upheld. For neglecting it under such circumstances is tantamount to neglecting the objectives of
the Lawgiver, which is to be avoided. Hence maslahah as such is a norm of the Shari'ah in its
own right; it is by no means extraneous to the Shari`ah but an integral pair of it.
 
4. 
5. When maslahah  is of the genus of the approved masalih  and is not upheld, the likely result
would be to inflict hardship on the people, which must be prevented.[19. Shatibi, I`tisam , II, 282-287; Abu
Zahrah, Usul , p. 223. ]6. 
7. Types of MaslahahThe masalih in general are divided into three types, namely, the 'essentials' ( daruriyyat ), the
'complementary' ( hajiyyat ), and the `embellishments' ( tahsiniyyat ). The Shari'ah  in all of its parts aims
at the realisation of one or the other of these masalih . The `essential' masalih  are those on which the
lives of people depend, and whose neglect leads to total disruption and chaos. They consist of the five
essential values ( al-daruriyyat al-khamsah ) namely religion, life, intellect, lineage and property. These
must not only be promoted but also protected against any real or unexpected threat which undermines
their safety. To uphold the faith would thus require observance of the prescribed forms of 'ibadat ,

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 239whereas the safety of life and intellect is secured by obtaining lawful means of sustenance as well as the
enforcement of penalties which the Shari'ah  has provided so as to protect them against destruction and
loss.[20. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , II, 3-5; Badran, Usul , p. 208.]The hajiyyat  are on the whole supplementary to the five essential values, and refer to interests whose
neglect leads to hardship in the life of the community although not to its collapse. Thus in the area of a
'ibadat the concessions ( rukhas ) that the Shari`ah has granted to the sick and to the traveler, permitting
them not to observe the fast, and to shorten the salah , are aimed at preventing hardship. Similarly, the
basic permissibility ( 'ibadah ) regarding the enjoyment of victuals and hunting is complementary to the
main objectives of protecting life and intellect.[21. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , II, 5; Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , pp.54-55.]The `embellishments' ( tahsiniyyat , also known as karahiyyah ) denote interests whose realisation lead to
improvement and the attainment of that which is desirable. Thus the observance of cleanliness in
personal appearance and 'ibadat , moral virtues, avoiding extravagance in consumption, and moderation
in the enforcement of penalties fall within the scope of tahsiniyyat .
It will be noted that the unrestricted maslahah  does not represent a specific category of its own in the
foregoing classification, for the obvious reason that it could fall into any of the three types of masalih .
Should it be the case that the realisation of maslahah mursalah is sine qua non to an essential
maslahah , then the former becomes a part of the latter. Likewise, if maslahah mursalah happens to be a
means to attaining one of the second classes of masalih , then it would itself fall into that category, and
so on. Furthermore, we may briefly add here the point which al-Shatibi has discussed at some length,
that the masalih  are all relative ( nibs, deaf ), and as such, all the varieties of maslahah , including the
essential masalih , partake in a measure of hardship and even mafsadah . Since there is no absolute
maslahah  as such, the determination of value in any type of maslahah  is based on the preponderance of
benefit that accrues from it, provided that the benefit in question is in harmony with the objectives of
the Lawgiver.[22. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , II, 27ff. ]From the viewpoint of the availability or otherwise of a textual authority in its favour, maslahah  is
farther divided into three types. First, there is maslahah  which the Lawgiver has expressly upheld and
enacted a law for its realisation. This is called al-maslahah al-mu'tabarah, or accredited maslahah , such
as protecting life by enacting the law of retaliation ( qisas ), or defending the right of ownership by
penalising the thief, or protecting the dignity and honour of the individual by penalising adultery and
false accusation. The Lawgiver has, in other words, upheld that each of these offences constitute a
proper ground ( wasf munasib ) for the punishment in question. The validity of maslahah  in these cases
is definitive and no longer open to debate. The ulema are in agreement that promoting and protecting
such values constitutes a proper ground for legislation. The fact that the Lawgiver has upheld them is
tantamount to His permission and approval of all measures, including legislation, that aim at their
realisation.[23. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 84; Badran, Usul , pp. 209-10.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 240But the masalih  that have been validated after the divine revelation came to an end fall under the second
class, namely the maslahah mursalah . Although this too consists of a proper attribute ( wasf munasib ) to
justify the necessary legislation, but since the Lawgiver has neither upheld nor nullified it, it constitutes
maslahah  of the second rank. For example, in recent times, the maslahah  which prompted legislation in
many Muslim countries providing that the claim of marriage, or of ownership in real property, can only
be proved by means of an official document has not been explicitly validated by the Shari'ah . The law
on these points has thus upheld the unrestricted maslahah ; more specifically it is designed to prevent a
mafsadah , which is the prevalence of perjury ( shahadah al-zur ) in the proof of these claims.[24. Khallaf, 'Ilm,
p. 85; Badran, Usul , p. 215.]The third variety of maslahah  is the discredited maslahah , or maslahah mulgha , which the Lawgiver
has nullified either explicitly or by an indication that could be found in the Shari'ah. The ulema are in
agreement that legislation in the pursuance of such interests is invalid and no judicial decree may be
issued in their favour. An example of this would be an attempt to give the son and the daughter an equal
share in inheritance on the assumption that this will secure a public interest. But since there is a clear
nass in the Qur'an (al-Nisa', 4:11) which assigns to the son double the portion of the daughter, the
apparent maslahah  in this case is clearly nullified ( mulgha ).[25. Badran, Usul , p. 209.]To summarize: when the Shari'ah provides an indication, whether direct or implicit, on the validity of a
maslahah , it falls under the accredited masalih . The opposite of this is maslahah mulgha , which is
overruled by a similar indication in the sources. The unrestricted maslahah  applies to all other cases
which are neither validated nor nullified by the Shari'ah .Conditions ( Shurut ) of Maslahah MursalahThe following conditions must be fulfilled in order to validate reliance on maslahah mursalah . These
conditions are designed so as to ensure that maslahah  does not become an instrument of arbitrary desire
or individual bias in legislation.
1 ) The maslahah  must be genuine ( haqiqiyyah ), as opposed to a specious maslahah  (maslahah
wahmiyyah ), which is not a proper ground for legislation. A mere suspicion or specious conjecture
(tawahhum ) that a certain legislation will be beneficial without ascertaining the necessary balance
between its possible benefits and harms is not sufficient. There must, in other words, be a reasonable
probability that the benefits of enacting a hukm  in the pursuance of maslahah  outweigh the harms that

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 241might accrue from it. An example of a specious maslahah , according to Khallaf, would be to abolish the
husband's right of talaq  by vesting it entirely in a court of law.[26. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 86.]Genuine masalih  are those which contemplate the protection of the five essential values noted above.
Protecting the faith, for example, necessitates the prevention of sedition ( fitnah ) and of the propagation
of heresy. It also means safeguarding freedom of belief in accordance with the Qur'anic principle that
'there shall be no compulsion in religion' (al-Baqarah, 2:256). Similarly, safeguarding the right to live
includes protecting the means which facilitate an honourable life such as the freedom to work, freedom
of speech, and freedom to travel. Protecting the intellect (` aql) necessitates the promotion of learning
and safeguards against calamities which corrupt the individual and make him a burden to society.
Furthermore, safeguarding the purity of lineage ( nasl) entails protection of the family and creation of a
favourable environment for the care and custody of children. And lastly, the protection of property
requires defending the right of ownership. It also means facilitating fair trade and the lawful exchange
of goods and services m the community.[27. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 220.]2) The second condition is that the maslahah  must be general ( kulliyyah ) in that it secures benefit, or
prevents harm, to the people as a whole and not to a particular person or group of persons. This means
that enacting a hukm on grounds of istislah  must contemplate a benefit yielded to the largest possible
number of people. It is not maslahah  if it secures the interest of a few individuals regardless of their
social and political status. The whole concept of maslahah  derives its validity from the idea that it
secures the welfare of the people at large.[28. Khallaf,` Ilm, p.87; Badran, Usul , p. 214.]3) Lastly, the maslahah  must not be in conflict with a principle or value which is upheld by the nass or
ijma`. Hence the argument, for example, that maslahah  in modern times would require the legalization
of usury ( riba) on account of the change in the circumstances in which it is practiced, comes into
conflict with the clear nass of the Qur'an. The view that riba in the way it is practiced in modern
banking does not fall under the Qur'anic prohibition, as Abu Zahrah points out, violates the nass and
therefore negates the whole concept of maslahah .[29. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 219; Badran, Usul , p. 215.]Imam Malik has added two other conditions to the foregoing, one of which is that the maslahah  must be
rational ( ma`qulah ) and acceptable to people of sound intellect. The other condition is that it must
prevent or remove hardship from the people, which is the express purpose of the Qur'anic ayah  in sura
al-Ma'idah (5:6) quoted above.[30. Shatibi, I`tisam , II, 307-14; Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p.51. ]Furthermore, according to al-Ghazali, maslahah , in order to be valid, must be essential ( al-maslahah al-
daruriyyah ). To illustrate this, al-Ghazali gives the example of when unbelievers in the battlefield take
a group of Muslims as hostages. If the situation is such that the safety of all the Muslims and their
victory necessitates the death of the hostages, then al-Ghazali permits this in the name of al-maslahah
al-daruriyyah .[31. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 141.] However the weakness of al-Ghazali's argument appears to be that

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 242the intended maslahah  in this example entails the killing of innocent Muslims, and the Shari'ah
provides no indication to validate this.[32. Badran. Usul , pp. 215-16.]Al-Tufi's View of Maslahah MursalahWhereas the majority of jurists do not allow recourse to istislah  in the presence of a textual ruling, a
prominent Hanbali jurist, Najm al-Din al-Tufi, stands out for his view which authorises recourse to
maslahah  with or without the existence of nass. In a treatise entitled al-Masalih al-Mursalah , which is a
commentary on the Hadith that `no harm shall be inflicted or reciprocated in Islam', al-Tufi argues that
this Hadith provides a clear nass in favour of maslahah . It enshrines the first and most important
principle of Shari'ah  and enables maslahah  to take precedence over all other considerations. Al-Tufi
precludes devotional matters, and specific injunctions such as the prescribed penalties, from the scope
of maslahah . In regard to these matters, the law can only be established by the nass and ijma`. If the
nass and ijma' endorse one another on ` ibadat , the proof is decisive and must be followed. Should there
be a conflict of authority between the nass and ijma' , but it is possible to reconcile them without
interfering with the integrity of either, this should be done. But if this is not possible, then ijma` should
take priority over other indications.[33. Tufi, Masalih , p.139.]As for transactions and temporal affairs ( ahkam al-mu'amalat wa al-siyasiyyat al-dunyawiyyah ), al-Tufi
maintains that if the text and other proofs of Shari'ah  happen to conform to the maslahah  of the people
in a particular case, they should be applied forthwith, but if they oppose it, then maslahah  should take
precedence over them. The conflict is really not between the  nass and maslahah , but between one nass
and another, the latter being the Hadith of la darar wa la dirar fi'l-Islam .[34. Tufi, Masalih , p. 141; Mustafa Zayd,
Maslahah , pp. 238-240. This book is entirely devoted to an exposition of Tufi's doctrine of Maslahah .] One must therefore not fail to act
upon that text which materialises the maslahah . This process would amount to restricting the
application of one nass by reason of another nass and not a suspension or abrogation thereof. It is a
process of specification ( takhsis ) and explanation ( bayan ), just as the Sunnah  is sometimes given
preference over the Qur'an by way of clarifying the text of the Qur'an.[35. Cf. Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 121; Abu
Zahrah, Usul , p. 223. A discussion of Tufi's doctrine can also be found in Kerr, Islamic Reform , p. 97ff. ]In the areas of transactions and governmental affairs, al-Tufi adds, maslahah  constitutes the goal
whereas the other proofs are like the means; the end must take precedence over the means. The rules of
Shari'ah  on these matters have been enacted in order to secure the masalih  of the people, and therefore
when there is a conflict between a maslahah  and nass, the Hadith la darar wa la dirar clearly dictates
that the former must take priority.[36. Tufi, Masalih , p.141; Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 131-132.] In short, al-Tufi's doctrine,
as Mahmassani has observed, amounts to saying after each ruling of the text, 'Provided public interest

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 243does not require otherwise.' [37. Mahmassani, Falsafah al-Tashri `, p. 117. This author also quotes Shaykh Mustafa al-Ghalayini in support of his
own view.]Differences between Istislah , Analogy, and IstihsanIn his effort to determine the shar`i ruling on a particular issue, the jurist must refer to the Qur'an, the
Sunnah  and ijma' . In the absence of any ruling in these sources, he must attempt qiyas  by identifying a
common 'illah between a ruling of the text and the issue for which a solution is wanting. However, if
the solution arrived at through qiyas leads to hardship or unfair results, he may depart from it in favour
of an alternative analogy in which the 'illah , although less obvious, is conducive to obtaining a
preferable solution. The alternative analogy is a preferable qiyas , or istihsan . In the event, however, that
no analogy can be applied, the jurist may resort to maslahah mursalah and formulate a ruling which, in
his opinion, serves a useful purpose or prevents a harm that may otherwise ensue. [38. Cf. Sabuni, Madkhal , pp.134-
35.]It thus appears that maslahah mursalah  and qiyas  have a feature in common in that both are applicable
to cases on which there is no clear ruling available in the  nusus or ijma' . They also resemble one
another in the sense that the benefit that is secured by recourse to them is based on a probability, or
zann , either in the form of a 'illah in the case of qiyas , or of a rational consideration which secures a
benefit in the case of maslahah mursalah . However, qiyas and maslahah differ from one another in
certain respects. The benefit which is secured by qiyas  is founded on an indication from the Lawgiver,
and a specific 'illah is identified to justify the analogy to the nass. But the benefit which is sought
through maslahah mursalah has no specific basis in the established law, whether in favour or against.
Maslahah mursalah in other words stands on its own justification, whereas qiyas  is the extension of a
ruling which already exists.
This explanation would also serve to clarify the main difference between maslahah and istihsan . A
ruling which is based on maslahah mursalah is original in the sense that it does not follow, or represent
a departure from, an existing precedent. As for istihsan , it only applies to cases on which there is a
precedent available (usually in the form of qiyas ), but istihsan  seeks a departure from it in favour of an
alternative ruling. This alternative may take the form of a hidden analogy ( qiyas khafi ), or of an
exception to a ruling of the existing law, each representing a variation of istihsan . [39. Cf. Badran, Usul , pp. 216-
217; Sabuni, Madkhal , p.135.]The Polemics over Maslahah

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 244The main point in the argument advanced by the opponents of istislah  is that the Shari'ah  takes full
cognizance of all the masalih ; it is all-inclusive and there is no maslahah  outside the Shari'ah  itself.
This is the view of the Zahiris and some Shafi'is like al-Amidi, and the Maliki jurist Ibn al-Hajib, who
do not recognise maslahah  as a proof in its own right. They maintain that the masalih  are all
exclusively contained in the nusus . When the Shari'ah  is totally silent on a matter, it is a sure sign that
the maslahah  in question is no more than a specious maslahah (maslahah wahmiyyah ) which is not a
valid ground for legislation.[40. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.88; Badran, Usul, p. 213.]The Hanafis and most Shafi'is have on the other hand adopted a relatively more flexible stance,
maintaining that the masalih are either validated in the explicit nusus , or indicated in the rationale
('illah ) of a given text, or even in the general objectives of the Lawgiver. Only in the presence of a
textual indication can maslahah  constitute a valid ground for legislation. The identification of the
causes (` ilal) and objectives, according to this view, entails the kind of enquiry into the 'illah that would
be required in qiyas . The main difference between this view and that of the Zahiris is that it validates
maslahah  on the basis of the rationale and the objective of the Shari'ah  even in the absence of a specific
nass. Both these views are founded in the argument that if maslahah  is not guided by the values upheld
in the nusus  there is a danger of confusing maslahah  with arbitrary desires, which might lead to
corruption and mafsadah . Experience has shown that this has frequently occurred at the behest of rulers
and governors who have justified their personal wishes in the name of maslahah . The way to avoid this
is indicated in the Qur'an, in sura al-Qiyamah (75:36) where we read: 'Does man think that he has been
left without guidance?' The maslahah  must therefore be guided by the values that the Lawgiver has
upheld. Hence there is no maslahah  unless it is corroborated by an indication in the Shari'ah .[41. Abu Zahrah,
Usul , pp. 221,224; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 88; Badran, Usul , p. 213.] While commenting on istihsan , Imam Ghazali writes: `We
know that the masalih  must always follow the shar'i  indications;  istihsan is not guided by such
indications and therefore amounts to no more than a whimsical opinion". As for maslahah mursalah , al-
Ghazali maintains that when it is not approved by the Lawgiver, it is like istihsan.[42. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I,138. ]Al-Ghazali recognises the `accredited' maslahah , that is, when the maslahah  is indicated in the nass. He
also approves of maslahah mursalah when it is based in definite necessity, that is, maslahah
daruriyyah . In the absence of a definite necessity, al-Ghazali maintains that maslahah  is not valid.
Consequently, al-Ghazali does not approve of the remaining two classes of the masalih , namely the
complementary ( hajiyyat ), and the embellishments ( tahsiniyyat ).[43. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 139-140.] By making the
stipulation that the maslahah , in order to be valid, must be founded in definite necessity, however, al-
Ghazali is no longer speaking of maslahah mursalah , but of necessity ( darurah ), which is a different
matter altogether and governed by a different set of rules.[44. Cf. Badran, Usul , p. 211.] It thus appears that this
view only validates the type of maslahah  which is referred to as maslahah mu'tabarah .
The opponents of istislah  further add that to accept istislah  as an independent proof of Shari`ah would
lead to disparity, even chaos, in the ahkam . The halal  and haram would be held to be applicable in

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 245some place or to some persons and not to others. This would not only violate the permanent and
timeless validity of the Shari'ah  but would open the door to corruption.[45. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.88. ]As already stated, the Hanafis and the Shafi`is do not accept istislah  as an independent proof. Al-Shafi'i
approves of maslahah only within the general scope of qiyas ; whereas Abu Hanifah validates it as a
variety of istihsan . This would explain why the Shafi`is and the Hanafis are both silent on the
conditions of  maslahah , as they treat the subject under qiyas and istihsan  respectively. They have
explained their position as follows: should there be an authority for maslahah  in the nusus , that is, if
maslahah  is one of the accredited masalih , then it will automatically fall within the scope of qiyas . In
the event where no such authority could be found in the nusus , it is maslahah mulgha and is of no
account. But it would be incorrect to say that there is a category of maslahah beyond the scope of the
nass and analogy to the nass. To maintain that maslahah mursalah is a proof would amount to saying
that the nusus  of the Qur'an and the Sunnah  are incomplete.[46. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 222; Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 61;
Badran, Usul , p. 213. ]The opponents of istislah  have further argued that the Lawgiver has validated certain masalih  and
overruled others. In between there remain, the maslahah mursalah which belongs to neither. It is
therefore equally open to the possibility of being regarded as valid ( mu'tabarah ) or invalid ( mulgha ).
Since there is no certainty as to their validity, no legislation may be based on it, for law must be
founded in certainty, not doubt.
In response to this, it is argued that the Lawgiver has proscribed certain masalih  not because there is no
benefit in them but mainly because of their conflict with other and superior masalih , or because they
lead to greater evil. None of these considerations would apply to maslahah mursalah , for the benefit in
it outweighs its possible harm. It should be borne in mind that the masalih  which the Lawgiver has
expressly overruled (i.e. masalih mulgha ) are few compared to those which are upheld. When we have
a case of masalih mursalah on which no clear authority may be found in the sources, and they appear to
be beneficial, they are more likely to belong to the part which is more extensive and preponderant
(kathir al-ghalib ), not to that which is limited and rare ( qalil al-nadir ). [47. Badran, Usul , p. 214.]The Zahiris do not admit speculative evidence of any kind as a proof of Shari`ah . They have invalidated
even qiyas , let alone maslahah , on the grounds that qiyas  partakes in speculation. The rules of Shari'ah
must be founded in certainty, and this is only true of the clear injunctions of the Qur'an, Sunnah  and
ijma' . Anything other than these is mere speculation, which should be renounced.[48. Ibn Hazm, Ihkam , V, 55-56.]As for the reports that the Companions issued fatwas  on the basis of their own ra'y which might have
partaken in maslahah , Ibn Hazm is categorical in saying that 'these reports do not bind anyone'.[49. Ibn
Hazm, Ihkam , VI, 40.] Thus it would follow that the Zahiris do not accept maslahah mursalah , which they
consider to be founded in personal opinion ( ra'y).[50. Cf. Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 62.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 246The Malikis and the Hanbalis have, on the other hand, held that maslahah mursalah is authoritative and
that all that is needed to validate action upon it is to fulfill the conditions which ensure its propriety.
When these conditions are met, maslahah becomes an integral part of the objectives of the Lawgiver
even in the absence of a particular nass. Ahmad b. Hanbal and his disciples are known to have based
many of their fatwas  on maslahah , which they have upheld as a proof of Shari'ah  and an instrument of
protecting the faith, securing justice, and preventing mafsadah . They have thus validated the death
penalty for spies whose activity violates the maslahah  of the Muslim community. The Hanbalis have
also validated, on grounds of maslahah , the death penalty for propagators of heresy when protecting the
maslahah  of the community requires this. But in all this, the Hanbalis, like the Malikis, insist that the
necessary conditions of maslahah  must be fulfilled. Maslahah  must pursue the valid objectives of the
Shari'ah  and the dictates of sound intellect, acting upon which fulfils a useful purpose, or serves to
prevent harm to the people.[51. Cf. Mustafa Zayd, Maslahah , p. 60.] Some of the more far-reaching instances of
maslahah  in the Maliki doctrine may be summarised as follows:
1. Imam Malik validated the pledging of bay`ah (oath of allegiance) to the mafdul , that is the
lesser of the two qualified candidates for the office of the Imam, so as to prevent disorder and
chaos afflicting the life of the community.[52. Shatibi, I'tisam , II, 303. ] 
2. 
3. When the Public Treasury ( bayt al-mal ) runs out of funds, the Imam may levy additional taxes
on the wealthy so as to meet the urgent needs of the government without which injustice and
sedition ( fitnah ) may become rampant.[53. Shatibi, I'tisam , II, 295. ] 
4. 
5. In the event where all the means of earning a lawful living are made inaccessible to a Muslim,
he is in a situation where he cannot escape to another place, and the only way for him to earn a
living is to engage in unlawful occupations; he may do so but only to the extent that is
necessary.[54. Shatibi, I'tisam , II, 300. ]6. 
7. ConclusionDespite their different approaches to maslahah , the leading ulema of the four Sunni schools are in
agreement, in principle, that all genuine masalih  which do not conflict with the objectives ( maqasid ) of
the Lawgiver must be upheld. This is the conclusion that both Khallaf and Abu Zahrah have drawn
from their investigations.[55. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 224; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.85. ] The Shafi'i and Hanafi approach to maslahah
is essentially the same as that of the Maliki and Hanbali schools, with the only difference being that the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 247former have attempted to establish a common ground between maslahah  and the qiyas  witch has an
identifiable ` illah. Some Maliki jurists, including Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi have observed that all the
jurists are essentially in agreement over the concept and validity of maslahah mursalah . They only
differ on points of procedure: while some would adopt it directly, others would do so by bringing the
maslahah within the purview of qiyas .[56. Qarafi, Furuq , II, 188; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 225.] But Imam Malik's concept of
maslahah  is the most far-reaching of the four Sunni schools. Since maslahah  must always be
harmonious with the objectives of the Lawgiver, it is a norm by itself. Maslahah mursalah as such
specifies the general (` Amm ) of the Qur'an, just as the ` Amm  of the Qur'an may be specified by qiyas . In
the event of conflict between a genuine maslahah  and a solitary Hadith, the former takes priority over
the latter.[57. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 225.]The changing conditions of life never cease to generate new interests. If legislation were to be confined
to the values which the Lawgiver has expressly decreed, the Shari'ah  would inevitably fall short of
meeting the masalih of the community. To close the door of maslahah  would be tantamount to
enforcing stagnation and unnecessary restriction on the capacity of the Shari'ah  to accommodate social
change. 'Abd al-Wahhab Khallaf is right in his assessment that any claim to the effect that the nusus of
the Shari'ah  are all-inclusive and cater for all eventualities is simply not true. The same author goes on
to say: 'There is no doubt that some of the masalih  have neither been upheld nor indicated by the
Shari'ah  in specific terms.'[58. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 88.]As for the concern that the opponents of maslahah mursalah have expressed that validating this
doctrine would enable arbitrary and self-seeking interests to find their way under the banner of
maslahah , they only need to be reminded that a careful observance of the conditions that are attached to
maslahah  will ensure that only the genuine interests of the people which are in harmony with the
objectives of the Shari'ah  would qualify. This concern is admittedly valid, but one which cannot be
confined to maslahah  alone. Arbitrariness and the pursuit of self-seeking interests have never been
totally eliminated in any society, under any legal system. It is a permanent threat which must be
carefully checked and minimized to the extent that this is possible. But this very purpose will be
defeated if legislation on grounds of istislah  were to be denied validity. To combat the evil of an
arbitrary indulgence which waves the banner of maslahah  would surely have greater prospects of
success if the mujtahid  and the Imam were to be able to enact the necessary legislation on grounds of
preventing harm to society. Consequently the argument that the opponents of maslahah  have advanced
would appear to be specious and self-defeating.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 248Chapter Fourteen: 'Urf (Custom)As a noun derived from its Arabic root 'arafa (to know), 'urf literally means 'that which is known'. In its
primary sense, it is the known as opposed to the unknown, the familiar and customary as opposed to the
unfamiliar and strange. ` Urf and 'adah are largely synonymous, and the majority of ulema have used
them as such. Some observers have, however, distinguished the two, holding that ` adah  means
repetition or recurrent practice, and can be used with regard to both individuals and groups. We refer,
for example, to the habits of individuals as their personal ` adah . But ` urf is not used in this capacity: we
do not refer to the personal habits of individuals as their ` urf. It is the collective practice of a large
number of people that is normally denoted by ` urf. The habits of a few or even a substantial minority
within a group do not constitute 'urf.[1. Badran, Usul , p. 224; Ziadeh, ' ' Urf and Law  ', p. 60; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 389.]'Urf is defined as 'recurring practices which are acceptable to people of sound nature.' This definition is
clear on the point that custom, in order to constitute a valid basis for legal decisions, must be sound and
reasonable. Hence recurring practices among some people in which there is no benefit or which partake
in prejudice and corruption are excluded from the definition of 'urf.[2. Mahmassani, Falsafah  (Ziadeh's trans.), p. 132;
Isma'il, Adillah , p. 388; Badran,  Usul , p. 224.] `Urf and its derivative, ma'ruf , occur in the Qur'an, and it is the latter of
the two which occurs more frequently. Ma'ruf , which literally means 'known' is, in its Qur'anic usage, is
equated with good, while its opposite, the munkar , or 'strange', is equated with evil. It is mainly in this
sense that 'urf and ma'ruf seem to have been used in the Qur'an. The commentators have generally
interpreted ma'ruf  in the Qur'an as denoting faith in God and His Messenger, and adherence to God's
injunctions. Thus the standard commentary on the Qur'anic phrase ta'muruna bi al-ma'ruf wa tanhawna
'an al-munkar (Al-Imran, 3:110) given by the exegetes is that 'you enjoin belief in God and in His
Messenger and enforce His laws, and you forbid disbelief and indulgence in the haram .'[3. Tabari, Tafsir , (Bulaq
1323-29), IV, 30; Ziadeh, ' ' Urf and Law  ', pp. 60-61; Isma'il,  Adillah , p. 401.] The same interpretation is given to the term ' 'urf ' in
the text which occurs in sura al-A'raf (7:199): `Keep to forgiveness, enjoin ` urf [wa'mur bi'l-`urf] and
turn away from the ignorant.' According to the exegetes, ` urf in this context means fear of God and the
observance of His commands and prohibitions. But occasionally, ma'ruf  in the Qur'an occurs in the
sense of good conduct, kindness and justice, especially when the term is applied to a particular
situation. It is only when ` urf or ma`ruf is ordered generally without reference to a particular matter,
situation or problem that it carries the meaning of adhering to God's injunctions. The reason for the
position taken by the exegetes becomes apparent if one bears in mind Islam's perspective on good and
evil ( husn wa-qubh ) which are, in principle, determined by divine revelation. Hence when God ordered
the promotion of ma'ruf , He could not have meant the good which reason or custom decrees to be such,
but what He enjoins.[4. Cf. Ziadeh,' ' Urf and Law' , p. 62. ] This would also explain why ` urf in the sense of custom is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 249not given prominence in the legal theory of the usul al-fiqh , although it carries some authority, as we
shall presently explain.
Custom which does not contravene the principles of Shari'ah  is valid and authoritative; it must be
observed and upheld by a court of law. According to a legal maxim which is recorded by the Shafi'i
jurist al-Suyuti, in his well-known work, al-Ashbah wa al-Nazai'r , 'What is proven by 'urf is like that
which is proven by a shar'i proof.' This legal maxim is also recorded by the Hanafi jurist al-Sarakhsi,
and was subsequently adopted in the Ottoman Majallah  which provides that custom, whether general or
specific, is enforceable and constitutes a basis of judicial decisions.[5. The Mejelle (Tyser's trans.) (Art. 36); Abu Zahrah,
Usul , p. 216; Mahmassani, Falsafah , p. 132.] The ulema have generally accepted  'urf as a valid criterion for purposes of
interpreting the Qur'an. To give an example, the Qur'anic commentators have referred to ` urf in
determining the precise amount of maintenance that a husband must provide for his wife. This is the
subject of sura al-Talaq (65:7) which provides: `Let those who possess means pay according to their
means.' In this ayah, the Qur'an does not specify the exact amount of maintenance, which is to be
determined by reference to custom. Similarly, in regard to the maintenance of children, the Qur'an only
specifies that this is the duty of the father, but leaves the quantum of maintenance to be determined by
reference to custom ( bi'l-ma`ruf ) (al-Baqarah, 2:233). The Shari'ah  has, in principle, accredited
approved custom as a valid ground in the determination of its rules relating to halal and haram . This is
in turn reflected in the practice of the fuqaha' , who have adopted 'urf, whether general or specific, as a
valid criterion in the determination of the ahkam  of Shari'ah .[6. Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 138; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 403.] The
rules of fiqh which are based in juristic opinion ( ra'y) or in speculative analogy and ijtihad  have often
been formulated in the light of prevailing custom; it is therefore, permissible to depart from them if the
custom on which they were founded changes in the course of time. The ijtihad  rules of fiqh are, for the
most part, changeable with changes of time and circumstance. To deny social change due recognition in
the determination of the rules of fiqh would amount to exposing the people to hardship, which the
Shari'ah  forbids. Sometimes even the same mujtahid  has changed his previous ijtihad  with a view to
bringing it into harmony with the prevailing custom. It is well -known, for example, that Imam al-
Shafi`i laid the foundations of his school in Iraq, but that when he went to Egypt, he changed some of
his earlier views owing to the different customs he encountered in Egyptian society.[7. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 217;
Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 82.]Customs which were prevalent during the lifetime of the Prophet and were not expressly overruled by
him are held to have received his tacit approval and become part of what is known as Sunnah
taqririyyah . Pre-Islamic Arabian custom which was thus approved by the Prophet was later upheld by
the Companions, who often referred to it through statements such as 'we used to do such-and-such
while the Prophet was alive'.[8. Ziadeh,' 'Urf and Law ', p. 62; Abdul Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 137; Mahmassani, Falsafah , p. 132.] Islam
has thus retained many pre-Islamic Arabian customs while it has at the same time overruled the
oppressive and corrupt practices of that society. Islam also attempted to amend and regulate some of the
Arab customary laws with a view to bringing them into line with the principles of the Shari'ah . The

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 250reverse of this is also true in the sense that pre-Islamic customs of Arabia influenced the Shari'ah  in its
formative stages of development. Even in the area of the verbal and actual Sunnah , there are instances
where Arabian custom has been upheld and incorporated within the Sunnah  of the Prophet An example
of this is the rulings of the Sunnah  concerning the liability of the kinsmen of an offender (i.e. the
`aqilah ) for the payment of blood money, or diyah . Similarly, the Sunnah  which regulates certain
transactions such as mortgage ( rahn ), advance sale ( salam ) and the requirement of equality ( kafa'ah ) in
marriage have their roots in the pre-Islamic custom of the Arabs. There are also vestiges of pre-Islamic
custom in the area of inheritance, such as the significance that the rules of inheritance attach to the male
line of relationship, known as the ` asabah . As for the post-Islamic custom of Arabian society, Imam
Malik has gone so far as to equate the amal ahl al-Madinah , that is the customary practice of the people
of Madinah, with ijma`. This type of 'amal ( lit.' practice') constitutes a source of law in the absence of
an explicit ruling in the Qur'an and Sunnah . Custom has also found its way into the Shari'ah  through
juristic preference ( istihsan ) and considerations of public interest ( maslahah ). And of course, ijma`
itself has to a large extent served as a vehicle of assimilating customary rules which were in harmony
with the Shari'ah , or were based in necessity ( darurah ), into the general body of the Shari'ah .[9. Mahmassani,
Falsafah , p. 132; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 143; Badran, Usul, p. 242.]Conditions of Valid ` UrfIn addition to being reasonable and acceptable to people of sound nature, ` urf, in order to be
authoritative, must fulfill the following requirements.
1) `Urf must represent a common and recurrent phenomenon. The practice of a few individuals or of a
limited number of people within a large community will not be authoritative, nor would a usage of this
nature be upheld as the basis of a judicial decision in Shari'ah  courts. The substance of this condition is
incorporated in the Majallah al-Ahkam al-`Adliyyah where it is provided that `effect is only given to
custom which is of regular occurrence' (Art. 14). To give an example, when a person buys a house or a
car, the question as to what is to be included in either of these is largely determined by custom, if this is
not otherwise specified in the terms of the agreement. More specifically, one would need to refer to the
common practice among estate agents or car dealers respectively. But if no custom could be established
as such, or there are disparate practices of various sorts, no custom could be said to exist and no judicial
order may be based on it. Custom, in order to be upheld, must not only be consistent but also dominant
in the sense that it is observed in all or most of the cases to which it can apply. If it is observed only in
some cases but not in others, it is not authoritative. Similarly, if there are two distinct customary
practices on one and the same matter, the one which is dominant is to be upheld. If, for example, a sale
is concluded in a city where two or three currencies are commonly accepted and the contract in question

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 251does not specify any, the one which is the more dominant and common will be deemed to apply.[10.
Mahmassani, Falsafah , pp. 133-134; Sabuni, Madkhal , pp. 139-140; Isma'il, Adillah , pp. 398-399.]2) Custom must also be in existence at the time a transaction is concluded. In contracts and commercial
transactions, effect is given only to customs which are prevalent at the time the transaction is
concluded, and not to customs of subsequent origin. This condition is particularly relevant to the
interpretation of documents, which are to be understood in the light of the custom that prevailed at the
time they were written. Consequently, a rule of custom which is prevalent at the time the interpretation
is attempted will not be relevant if it only became prevalent after the document was concluded. For it is
generally assumed that documents which are not self-evident and require clarification can only convey
concepts that were common at the time they were written.[11. Mahmassani, Falsafah , p.134; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 143.]3) Custom must not contravene the clear stipulation of an agreement. The general rule is that
contractual agreements prevail over custom, and recourse to custom is only valid in the absence of an
agreement. Since contractual agreements are stronger than custom, should there arise a conflict between
them it will normally be determined in favour, of the former. If for example the prevailing custom in
regard to the provision of dower ( mahr ) in marriage requires the payment of one-half at the time of the
conclusion of the contract and the remainder at a later date, but the contract clearly stipulates the
prompt payment of the whole of the dower, the rule of custom would be of no account in the face of this
stipulation. For custom is only to be invoked when no clear text can be found to determine the terms of
a particular dispute; and whenever a clear text is in existence, recourse to custom will be out of the
question. To give another example: the costs of formal registration in the sale of real property are
customarily payable by the purchaser. But if there is a stipulation in the contract that specifically
requires the vendor to bear those costs, then the custom will be of no account and the purchaser will not
be required to pay the costs of registration.[12. Isma'il, Adillah , p. 400.]4) Lastly, custom must not violate the nass, that is, the definitive principle of the law. The opposition of
custom to nass may either be absolute or partial. If it is the former, there is no doubt that custom must
be set aside. Examples of such conflicts are encountered in the bedouin practice of disinheriting the
female heirs, or the practice of usury ( riba) and wine-drinking. The fact that these are widely practiced
is of no consequence, as in each case there is a prohibitory nass, or a command which always takes
priority, and no concession or allowance is made for the practice in question. But if the conflict between
custom and text is not absolute in that the custom opposes only certain aspects of the text, then custom
is allowed to act as a limiting factor on the text. The contract of istisna `, that is, the order for the
manufacture of goods at an agreed price, may serve as an example here. According to a Hadith, 'the
Prophet prohibited the sale of non-existing objects but he permitted salam  (i.e. advance sale in which
the price is determined but delivery postponed)'.[13. Bukhari, Sahih , III, 44 ( Kitab al-Salam , Hadith nos. 1-3); Badran, Usul , p. 121.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 252This Hadith is general in that it applies to all varieties of sale in which the object of sale is not present at
the time of contract. Salam  was exceptionally permitted as it was deemed to be of benefit to the people.
The general prohibition in this Hadith would equally apply to istisna' as in this case too the object of
sale is non-existent at the time of contract. But since  istisna' was commonly practiced among people of
all ages, the fuqaha  have validated it on grounds of general custom. The conflict between istisna' and
the ruling of the Hadith is not absolute, because the Hadith has explicitly validated salam . If realisation
of benefit to the people was the main ground of the concession that has been granted in respect of
salam , then istisna` presents  a similar case. Consequently the custom concerning istisna ` is allowed to
operate as a limiting factor on the textual ruling of the Hadith in that the Hadith is qualified by the
custom concerning istisna' .
Another example where a general text is qualified by custom is when a person is appointed to act as
agent ( wakil ) for another in respect of concluding a particular contract such as sale or marriage. The
agent's power to conclude the contract, although not limited by the terms of his appointment, is
nevertheless qualified by the prevalent custom. In the matter of sale, for example, the expected price
which represents the fair market price would be upheld, and the currency of the locality would be
accepted in exchange.
According to a Hadith, the Prophet is said to have forbidden conditional sale, that is, sale with
conditions that may not be in agreement with the nature of this contract. An example of this would be
when A sells his car to B for 10,000 dollars on condition that B sells his house to A for 50,000 dollars.
The Hadith quoted to this effect provides that the Prophet 'forbade sale coupled with a condition'.
However, the majority of Hanafi and Maliki jurists have validated conditions which are accepted by the
people at large and which represent standard custom. Here again the general prohibition is retained, but
only conditions that are adopted by ` urf are upheld; the general terms of the Hadith are, in other words,
qualified by custom.[14. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 161; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 217; Badran, Usul , p. 230.]It would be useful in this connection to distinguish 'urf from ijma' , for they have much in common with
one another, which is why they are sometimes confused. But despite their similarities, there are
substantial differences between ` urf and ijma` which may be summarised as follows:
1) `Urf materialises by the agreement of all, or the dominant majority of, the people and its existence is
not affected by the exception or disagreement of a few individuals. Ijma` on the other hand requires, for
its conclusion, the consensus of all the mujtahidun  of the period or the generation in which it
materialises. Disagreement and dissension has no place in ijma`, and any level of disagreement among
the mujtahidun  invalidates ijma`.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 2532) Custom does not depend on the agreement of the mujtahidun , but must be accepted by the majority
of the people, including the mujtahidun . The laymen have, on the other hand, no say in ijma' on
juridical matters, which require the participation only of the learned members of the community.
3) The rules of ` urf are changeable, and a custom may in course of time give way to another custom or
may simply disappear with a change of circumstances. But this is not the case with ijma`. Once an ijma'
is concluded, it precludes fresh ijtihad  on the same issue and is not open to abrogation or amendments.
`Urf on the other hand leaves open the possibility of fresh ijtihad , and a ruling of ijtihad  which is
founded in 'urf may be changed even if the ` urf in which it originates does not.
4) Lastly, ` urf requires an element of continuity in that it can only materialise if it exists over a period
of time. Ijma` can, on the other hand, come into existence whenever the mujtahidun  reach a unanimous
agreement which, in principle, requires no continuity for its conclusion.[15. Badran, Usul , p. 225; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 291. ]Types of CustomCustom is initially divided into two types, namely verbal ( qawli ) and actual ( fi'li). Verbal ` urf consists
of the general agreement of the people on the usage and meaning of words deployed for purposes other
than their literal meaning. As a result of such agreement, the customary meaning tends to become
dominant and the original or literal meaning is reduced to the status of an exception. There are many
examples in the Qur'an and Sunnah  of words which have been used for a meaning other than their literal
one, which were as a result commonly accepted by popular usage. Words such as salah , zakah  and hajj
have been used in the Qur'an for purposes other than their literal meanings, and this usage eventually
became dominant to the extent that the literal meaning of these words was consigned to obscurity. The
verbal custom concerning the use of these words thus originated in the Qur'an and was subsequently
accepted by popular custom. We also find instances of divergences between the literal and the
customary meanings of words in the Qur'an where the literal meaning is applied regardless of the
customary meaning. The word walad , for example, is used in the Qur'an in its literal sense, that is
`offspring' whether a son or daughter (note sura al-Nisa', 4:11), but in its popular usage walad  is used
for sons only. Another example is lahm , that is, meat, which in its Qur'anic usage includes fish, but in
its customary usage is applied only to meat other than fish. Whenever words of this nature, that is,
words which have acquired a different meaning in customary usage, occur in contracts, oaths and
commercial transactions, their customary meaning will prevail. For example, when a person takes an
oath that he will never 'set foot' at so-and-so's house, what is meant by this expression is the customary
meaning, namely, actually entering the house. In this sense, the person will have broken the oath if he
enters the house while never 'setting foot', such as by entering the house while mounted. But if he only

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 254technically sets his foot in the house without entering it, he will not be liable to expiation ( kaffarah ) for
breaking his oath.[16. Isma'il, Adillah , pp. 392-393; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 137; Badran, Usul , p. 226.] For this would not amount to
what is customarily meant by 'setting foot in the house.
Actual ` urf consists of commonly recurrent practices which are accepted by the people. An example of
actual  'urf is the give-and-take sale, or bay' al-ta'ati , which is normally concluded without utterances of
offer and acceptance. Similarly, customary rules regarding the payment of dower in marriage may
require a certain amount to be paid at the time of contract and the rest at a later date. The validity of this
type of custom is endorsed by the legal maxim which reads: 'What is accepted by 'urf is tantamount to a
stipulated agreement ( al-ma'ruf `urfan ka'l-mashrut shartan ).' Consequently, actual ` urf is to be upheld
and applied in the absence of an agreement to the contrary.
`Urf, whether actual or verbal, is once again divided into the two types of general and special: al-urf al-
`amm and al-'urf al-khass respectively. A general ` urf is one which is prevalent everywhere and on
which the people agree regardless of the passage of time. A typical example of this is bay al-ta'ati to
which reference has already been made. Similarly, the customary practice of charging a fixed price for
entry to public baths is another example of general 'urf, which is anomalous to the strict requirements of
sale (as it entails consuming an unknown quantity of water) but the people have accepted it and it is
therefore valid. It will be further noted that in their formulation of the doctrine of istihsan , the Hanafi
jurists have validated departure from a ruling of qiyas  in favour of general 'urf. This has already been
elaborated in the separate chapter on istihsan .[17. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 217; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 138; Aghnides, Muhammedan
Theories , p. 81.]"Special custom" is 'urf which is prevalent in a particular locality, profession or trade. By its very
nature, it is not a requirement of this type of 'urf that it be accepted by people everywhere. According to
the preferred view of the Hanafi school, special 'urf does not qualify the general provisions of the nass,
although some Hanafi jurists have held otherwise. Consequently, this type of ' urf is entirely ignored
when it is found to be in conflict with the nass. The general rule to be stated here is that the ahkam  of
Shari'ah  pertaining to the authority of 'urf only contemplate the provisions of general 'urf. A ruling of
qiyas , especially qiyas  whose effective cause is not expressly stated in the  nass , that is, qiyas ghayr
mansus al-'illah , may be abandoned in favour of a general ` urf, but will prevail if it conflicts with
special 'urf. A number of prominent ulema have, however, given the fatwa  that special 'urf should
command the same authority as general 'urf in this respect. The reason why general 'urf is given priority
over qiyas  is that the former is indicative of the people's need, whose disregard may amount to an
imposition of hardship on them. Some Hanafi jurists like Ibn al-Humam have taught that 'urf in this
situation commands an authority equivalent to that of ijma' , and that as such it must be given priority
over qiyas . It is perhaps relevant here to add that Abu Hanifah's disciple, al-Shaybani, validated the sale
of honeybees and silkworms as this was commonly practiced during his time despite the analogical
ruling that Abu Hanifah had given against it on the grounds that they did not amount to a valuable

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 255commodity ( mal). Furthermore, the ulema have recorded the view that since 'urf is given priority over
qiyas  despite the fact that qiyas  originates in the nusus  of the Qur'an and Sunnah , it will a fortiori be
preferred over considerations of public interest ( maslahah ) which are not rooted in the nusus . Having
said this, however, it would seem that cases of conflict between general 'urf and maslahah  would be
rather rare. For 'urf by definition must be sound and reasonable, considerations which tend to bring 'urf
close to maslahah . For after all, 'urf and maslahah  each in their respective capacities serve as a means
for the realisation of public welfare and the prevention of hardship to people.
And lastly, from the viewpoint of its conformity or otherwise with the Shari'ah , custom is once again
divided into the two types of approved or valid custom ( al-`urf al-sahih ) and disapproved custom ( al-
'urf al-fasid ). As is indicated in the terms of these expressions, the approved 'urf is one which is
observed by the people at large without there being any indication in the Shari'ah  that it contravenes
any of its principles. The disapproved custom is also practiced by the people but there is evidence to
show that it a repugnant to the principles of Shari'ah . We have already referred to the bedouin practice
of disinheriting female relatives, and the prevalence of riba, which although commonly practiced are
both in clear violation of the Shari'ah , and as such represent examples of al-'urf al-fasid .[18. Badran, Usul , p.
231; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 393.]Proof ( Hujjiyyah ) of ` UrfAlthough the ulema have attempted to locate textual authority for 'urf in the Qur'an, their attempt has
not been free of difficulties. To begin with, reference is usually made to the Qur'anic text in sura al-Hajj
(22:78) which provides: `God has not laid upon you any hardship in religion.' This is obviously not a
direct authority on the subject, but it is argued that ignoring the prevailing ` urf which does not conflict
with the nusus of Shari'ah  is likely to lead to adhering hardship on the people, which must be avoided.
The next ayah  which is quoted in support of ` urf occurs in sura al-A'raf (7:199), but although this has a
direct reference to ` urf, difficulties have been encountered in identifying it as its main authority. This
ayah , to which a reference has already been made, enjoins the Prophet to 'keep to forgiveness, and
enjoin ` urf, and turn away from the ignorant'. According to the Maliki jurist Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi,
this ayah  is explicit and provides a clear authority for ` urf. According to this view ` urf is clearly upheld
in the Qur'an as a proof of Shari'ah  and an integral part of it.[19. Qarafi, Furuq , II, 85; Sabuni, Madkhal , p. 143; Badran, Usul, p.
226.] The generality of ulema, however, maintain the view that the reference to ` urf in this ayah  is to the
literal meaning of the word, that is, to the familiar and good, and not to custom as such. But then it is
added: bearing in mind that approved custom is normally upheld by people of sound nature and
intellect, the Qur'anic concept of 'urf comes close to the technical meaning of this word. The literal or
the Qur'anic meaning of 'urf, in other words, corroborates its technical meaning and the two usages of

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 256the word are in essential harmony with one another. The commentators, however, further add that since
the word 'urf in this ayah  can mean many things, including `profession of the faith', `that which the
people consider good', and of course `that which is familiar and known', as well as ` urf in the sense of
custom, it cannot be quoted as textual authority for custom as such.[20. Tabari, Tafsir , IV, 30; Isma' il, Adillah , pp. 401-402;
Ziadeh,' 'Urf and Law', pp.61-62.] Among the indirect evidence in support of 'urf the ulema have also quoted the
following saying of the prominent Companion, `Abd Allah b. Mas'ud, that 'what the Muslims deem to
be good is good in the sight of God'.
Although many scholars have considered this to be a Hadith from the Prophet, it is more likely, as al-
Shatibi points out, to be a saying of `Abd Allah b. Mas`ud.[21. Shatibi, I'tisam , II, 319. Mahmassani ( Falsafah , p. 77) has also
reached the conclusion that this is the saying of `Abd Allah b. Mas'ud. But Amidi ( Ihkam , I. 214) has quoted it as a Hadith.] The critics have,
however, suggested that this saying/Hadith refers to the approval of ` al-muslimun' , that is, all the
Muslims, whereas ` urf varies from place to place, and the approval of all Muslims in its favour cannot
be taken for granted. In response to this, it has been further suggested that ` muslimun ' in this context
only denotes those among them who possess sound intellect and judgement, and not necessarily every
individual member of the Muslim community.[22. Cf. Isma'il, Adillah , p.402.]The upshot of this whole debate over the authoritativeness of 'urf seems to be that notwithstanding the
significant role that it has played in the development of the Shari'ah , it is not an independent proof in its
own right. The reluctance of the ulema in recognising 'urf as a proof has been partly due to the
circumstantial character of the principle, in that it is changeable upon changes of conditions of time and
place. This would mean that the rules of fiqh which have at one time been formulated in the light of the
prevailing custom would be liable to change when the same custom is no longer prevalent. The
differential fatwas  that the later ulema of different schools have occasionally given in opposition to
those of their predecessors on the same issues are reflective of the change of custom on which the fatwa
was founded in the first place. In addition, since custom is basically unstable it is often difficult to
ascertain its precise terms. These terms may not be self-evident, and the frequent absence of written
records and documents might ass to the difficulty of verification.[23. Cf. Badran, Usul , p. 233.]Another factor which merits attention in this context is the development of statutory legislation as an
instrument of government in modern times. The attempt to codify the law into self-contained statutes
has to some extent reduced the need to rely on social custom as the basis of decision-making. But even
so, it would be far from accurate to say that custom has ceased to play an important role both as a
source of law and a basis of judicial decision-making. This is perhaps evident from the general
reference to custom as a supplementary source of law in the civil codes of many Islamic countries of
today. The typical style of reference to custom in such statutes appears to be that custom is authoritative
in the absence of a provision in the statute concerning a particular dispute.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 257The fuqaha  of the later ages ( muta'akhkhirun ) are on record as having changed the rulings of the earlier
jurists which were based in custom owing to subsequent changes in the custom itself. The examples
which are given below will show that the jurists have on the whole accepted 'urf not only as a valid
basis of ijtihad  but also as the key indicator of the need for legal reform:
1) Under the rules of fiqh, a man who causes harm to another by giving him false information is not
responsible for the damage he has caused. The rule of fiqh that applies to such cases is that the
mubashir , that is, the one who acted directly, is responsible for the losses. However owing to the spread
of dishonesty and corruption, the later fuquha' have validated a departure from this rule in favour of
holding the false reporter responsible for the losses caused.[24. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.218.]2) According to Imam Abu Hanifah, when the qadi personally trusts the reliability of a witness who
testifies before him, there is no need for recourse to cross-examination or tazkiyah . This ruling is based
on the Hadith which provides that 'Muslims are ` udul [i.e. upright and trustworthy] in relationship to
one another'.
Abu Hanifah's ruling was obviously deemed appropriate for the time in which it was formulated. But
experience in later times aroused concern over dishonesty and lying by witnesses. It was consequently
considered necessary to take precautions so as to prevent perjury, and the ulema reached the opinion
that tazkiyah  should be applied as a standard practice to all witnesses. Abu Hanifah's disciples are
reported to have given a fatwa  in favour of making tazkiyah  a regular judicial practice. Consequently
tazkiyah  was held to be a condition for admitting the testimony of witnesses, and a ruling was
formulated to the effect that no testimony without tazkiyah  may constitute the basis of a court
decision.[25. Bayhaqi, al-Sunan al-Kubra , X, 155-56. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 219; Sabuni, Madkhal , pp.144-45]3) According to the accepted rule of the Hanafi school, which is attributed to Abu Hanifah himself, no-
one was allowed to charge any fees for teaching the Qur'an, or the principles of the faith. For teaching
these subjects was held to be a form of worship ( 'ibadah ) and no reward for it was to be expected from
anyone other than God. But subsequent experience showed that some people were reluctant to teach the
Qur'an, and an incentive by way of remuneration was considered necessary in order to encourage the
teaching of Islam. Consequently the fuqaha' gave a  fatwa in favour of charging fees for teaching the
Qur'an.[26. Abu Zahrah, Usul, p. 219.]4) Among the rules of fiqh which have tended to 'change with the change of custom, there is one
concerning the determination of the age by which a missing person ( mafqud ) is to be declared dead.
According to the generally accepted view, the missing person must not be declared dead until he
reaches the age at which his contemporaries would normally be expected to die. Consequently the
jurists of the Hanafi-school have variously determined this age at seventy, ninety and one hundred, and

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 258their respective rulings have taken into consideration the changes of experience and conditions that
prevailed at the time the new rulings were formulated.[27. Sabuni, Madkhal , p.145.]5) And lastly, in the area of transactions, the concept of  al-ghabn al-fahish , that is, radical discrepancy
between the market price of a commodity and the actual price charged to the customer, is determined
with reference to ` urf. To ascertain what margin of discrepancy in a particular transaction amounts to
al-ghabn al-fahish is determined by reference to the practice among tradesmen and people who are
engaged in similar transactions. Since these practices are liable to change, the changes are in turn
reflected in the determination of what might amount to al-ghabn al-fahish .[27. Sabuni, Madkhal , p.145.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 259Chapter Fifteen: Istishab  (Presumption of Continuity)Literally, Istishab  means 'escorting' or `companionship'. Technically, istishab  denotes a rational proof
which may be employed in the absence of other indications; specifically, those facts, or rules of law and
reason, whose existence or non-existence had been proven in the past, and which are presumed to
remain so for lack of evidence to establish any change. The technical meaning of istishab  relates to its
literal meaning in the sense that the past `accompanies' the present without any interruption or change.[1.
Shawkani,  Irshad , p. 237; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 127; Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , I, 294.] Istishab  is validated by the Shafi'i school, the
Hanbalis, the Zahiris and the Shi'ah Imamiyyah, but the Hanafis, the Malikis and the mutakallimun ,
including Abu al-Husayn al-Basri do not consider it a proof in its own right. The opponents of istishab
are of the view that establishing the existence of a fact in the past is no proof of as continued existence.
The continued existence of the original state is still in need of proof in the same way as the claim which
seeks to establish that the original condition has changed.[2. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 237; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 234; Mahmassani,
Falsafah  (Ziadeh's trans.) p.95. ]For the Shafi`is and the Hanbalis, istishab  denotes 'continuation of that which is proven and the
negation of that which had not existed'. Istishab , in other words, presumes the continuation of both the
positive and the negative until the contrary is established by evidence. In its positive sense, istishab
requires, for example, that once a contract of sale (or of marriage for that matter), is concluded, it is
presumed to remain in force until there is a change. Thus the ownership of the purchaser, and the
marital status of the spouses, arc presumed to continue until a transfer of ownership, or dissolution of
marriage, can be established by evidence. Since both of these contracts are permanently valid under the
Shari'ah  and do not admit of any time limits it is reasonable to presume their continuity until there is
evidence to the contrary. A mere possibility that the property in question might have been sold, or that
the marriage might have been dissolved, is not enough to rebut the presumption of istishab .[3. Ibn al-Qayyim,
I'lam , I, 294; Badran, Usul , p. 218; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 234.] However, if the law only validates a contract on a temporary
basis, such as lease and hire ( ijarah ), then istishab  cannot presume its continuity on a permanent basis.
The contract will continue to operate within the specified period and terminate when the period expires.
Istishab also presumes the continuation of the negative. For example, A purchases a hunting dog from
B with the proviso that it has been trained to hunt, but then A claims that the dog is untrained. A's claim
will be acceptable under istishab  unless there is evidence to the contrary. For istishab  maintains the
natural state of things, which in the case of animals is the absence of training.[4. Badran, Usul , p. 218.]Presumption of continuity under istishab  is different from the continued validity of a rule of law in a
particular case. The false accuser, for example, may never be admitted as a witness, a rule which is laid

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 260down in a clear Qur'anic text (al-Nur, 24:5). The permanent validity of the hukm  in this case is
established by the legal text, which is in no need of any presumption. Istishab  only applies when no
other evidence ( dalil) is available, which is obviously not the case when there is a clear text that could
be invoked.[5. Badran, Usul , p. 218.]Since istishab  consists of a probability, namely the presumed continuity of the status quo ante , it is not
a strong ground for the deduction of the rules of Shari'ah . Hence when istishab  comes into conflict with
another proof, the latter takes priority. As it is, istishab  is the last ground of fatwa : when the jurist is
asked about the ruling of a particular case, he must first search for a solution in the Qur'an, the Sunnah ,
consensus of opinion, and qiyas . If a solution is still wanting, he may resort to istishab  in either its
positive or negative capacities. Should there be doubt over the non-existence of something, it will be
presumed to exist, but if the doubt is in the proof of something, the presumption will be that it is not
proven. In the case of a missing person, for example, the nature of the situation is such that no other
proof of Shari'ah could be employed to determine the question of his life or death. Since the main
feature of the doubt concerning a missing person is the possibility of his death, istishab will presume
that he is still alive. But in the event of an unsubstantiated claim when, for example, A claims that B
owes him a sum of money, the doubt here is concerned with the proof over the existence of a debt,
which will be presumed unproven.[6. Shawkani, Irshad , p.237; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 235.]With regard to the determination of the rules of law that may be applicable to a particular issue, the
presumption of istishab  is also guided by the general norms of the Shari'ah . The legal norm concerning
foods, drinks, and clothes, for example, is permissibility ( ibahah ). When a question arises as to the
legality of a particular kind of beverage or food, and there is no other evidence to determine its value,
recourse may be had to istishab , which will presume that it is permissible. But when the norm in regard
to something is prohibition, such as cohabitation between members of the opposite sex, the presumption
will be one of prohibition, unless there is evidence to prove its legality.
Istishab  is supported by both shar`i and rational (` aqli) evidences. Reason tells us that in God's order of
creation and in popular custom, it is normal to expect that pledges, contracts and laws will probably
continue to remain operative until the contrary is established by evidence. It is equally normal to expect
that things which had not existed will probably remain so until the contrary is proved. When reasonable
men ( 'uqala' ) and men who comply with the accepted norms of society ( ahl al-`urf ) have known of the
existence or non-existence of something, as al-Amidi observes, from that point onwards they tend to
formulate their judgement, on the basis of what they know, until they are assured by their own
observation or evidence that there is a change.[7. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 128; Badran, Usul , p.221.] Reason also tells us not to
accept claims, unsubstantiated by evidence, that suggest a change in a status quo which is otherwise
expected to continue. Hence a mere claim that a just person ( ` adil) has become a profligate ( fasiq ) will
be of no account, and the person will be presumed to be 'adil until the contrary is established. Similarly,
when a student is admitted and registered for a degree course his status as a student remains unchanged

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 261until there is evidence to suggest that this is no longer the case. But until then there is no need for him
to prove his status every week or every month.[8. Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 235.]To presume the continuity of something which might have been present or absent in the past, as al-
Amidi points out, is equivalent to a zann  which is valid evidence in juridical ( shar'i ) matters, and action
upon it is justified.[9. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 127.] The rules of Shari'ah  continue to remain valid until there is a
change in the law or in the subject to which it is applied. The Law, for example, has forbidden the
consumption of wine, a ruling which will remain in force until there is a state of emergency or the wine
loses its intoxicating quality, such as by being changed into vinegar.Varieties of IstishabFrom the viewpoint of the nature of the conditions that are presumed to continue, istishab is divided
into four types an follows:
1) Presumption of original absence ( istishab al-'adam al-asli ), which means that a fact or rule of law
which had not existed in the past is presumed to be non-existent until the contrary is proved. Thus a
child and an uneducated person are presumed to remain so until there is a change in their status, for
example by attaining majority, or obtaining educational qualifications respectively. Similarly if A, who
is a trading partner to B, claims that he has made no profit, the presumption of absence will be in A's
favour unless B can prove otherwise. Another area which is determined by the presumption of original
absence is the original freedom from liability, or the presumption of innocence, which will be
separately discussed later.[10. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 238; Badran, Usul , p. 219; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 236.]2) Presumption of original presence ( istishab al-wujud al-asli ). This variety of istishab  takes for granted
the presence or existence of that which is indicated by the law or reason. For example, when A is
known to be indebted to B, A is presumed such until it is proved that he has paid the debt or was
acquitted of it. Provided that B's loan to A is proven in the first place as a fact, this is sufficient to give
rise to the presumption of its continuity and B need not prove the continuity of the loan in question
every day of the month. Similarly, under the presumption of original presence, the purchaser is
presumed liable to pay the purchase price by virtue of the presence of the contract of sale until it is
proved that he has paid it. By the same token, a husband is liable to pay his wife the dower ( mahr ) by
virtue of the existence of a valid marriage contract. In all these instances, istishab presumes the
presence of a liability or a right until an indication to the contrary is found. The ulema are in agreement
on the validity of this type of istishab , which must prevail until the contrary is proved.[11. Khallaf,` Ilm, p.92.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 2623) Istishab al-hukm , or istishab  which presumes the continuity of the general rules and principle, of the
law. As earlier stated, istishab  is not only concerned with presumption of facts but also with the
established rules and principles of the law. Istishab thus takes for granted the continued validity of the
provisions of the Shari'ah  in regard to permissibility and prohibition ( halal  and haram ). When there is a
ruling in the law, whether prohibitory or permissive, it will be presumed to continue until the contrary is
proved. But when there is no such ruling available, recourse will be had to the principle of ibahah ,
which is the general norm of Shari'ah  law concerning a matter that is deemed beneficial and free of evil
consequences. Hence when the law is silent on a matter and it is not repugnant to reason it will be
presumed to be permissible. This is the majority view, although some Mu'tazilah have held a variant
opinion, which is that the general norm in Shari'ah  is prohibition unless there is an indication to the
contrary. The principle of permissibility ( ibahah ) originates in the Qur'an, in particular those of its
passages which subjugate the earth and its resources to the welfare of man. Thus we read in sura al-
Baqarah (2:29): `It is He who has created for you all that is in the earth,' and in sura al-Jathiyah, (45:13)
that 'God has subjugated to you all that is in the heavens and in the earth.' These Qur'anic declarations
take for granted that man should be able to utilise the resources of the world around him to his
advantage, which is another way of saying that he is generally permitted to act in the direction of
securing his benefits unless he has been expressly prohibited. Hence all objects, legal acts, contracts and
exchange of goods and services which are beneficial to human beings are lawful on grounds of original
ibahah .[12. Abu Zahrah, Usul,  p. 236; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 92; Badran, Usul , p. 219; Khudari, Usul , pp. 354-55.] But when the legal norm in
regard to something is prohibition, then istishab  presumes its continuity until there is evidence to
suggest that it is no longer prohibited.
4) Istishab al-wasf , or continuity of attributes, such as presuming clean water (purity being an attribute)
to remain so until the contrary is established to be the case (for example, through a change in its colour
or taste). Similarly, when a person makes an ablution to perform the salah , the attribute of ritual purity
(taharah ) is presumed to continue until it is vitiated. A mere doubt that it might have been vitiated is
not sufficient to nullify taharah . By the same token, a guarantor ( kafil - kafalah  being a juridical
attribute) remains responsible for the debt of which he is guarantor until he or the debtor pays it or
when the creditor acquits him from payment.[13. Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , I, 295; Badran, Usul , p. 219.]The jurists are in agreement on the validity, in principle, of the first three types of istishab , although
they have differed in their detailed implementation, as we shall presently discuss. As for the fourth type
of istishab , which relates to the attributes, whether new or well-established, it is a subject on which the
jurists have disagreed. The Shafi'i and the Hanbali schools have upheld it absolutely, whereas the
Hanafi and Maliki schools accept it with reservations. The case of the missing person is discussed under
this variety of istishab , as the question is mainly concerned with the continuity of his life-life being the
attribute. Since the missing person ( mafqud ) was alive at the time when he disappeared, he is presumed
to be alive unless there is proof that he has died. He is therefore entitled, under the Shafi'i and Hanbali
doctrines, to inherit from a relative who dies while he is still a missing person. But no-one is entitled to

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 263inherit from him for the obvious reason that he is presumed alive. Yet under the Hanafi and Maliki law,
the missing person neither inherits from others nor can others inherit from him. The Hanafis and
Malikis accept istishab al-wasf only as a means of defense, that is, to defend the continued existence of
an attribute, but not as a means of proving new rights and new attributes. Istishab  can therefore not be
used as a means of acquiring new rights for the missing person, but can be used so as to protect all of
his existing rights. To use a common expression, istishab  can only be used as a shield, not as a sword.
If, for example, the missing person had owned property at the time of his disappearance, he continues to
be the owner. Similarly his marital rights are presumed to continue, just as he remains responsible to
discharge his obligations until his death is established by evidence or by a judicial decree. But for as
long as he remains a missing person, he will not be given a share in inheritance or bequest, although a
share will be reserved for him until the facts of his life or death are established. If he is declared dead,
the reserved share will be distributed among the other heirs on the assumption that he was dead at the
time of the death of his relative. Upon declaration of his death his own estate will be distributed among
his heirs as of the time the court declares him dead. This is the position under the Hanafi and Maliki
schools, which maintain that although the mafqud is presumed to be alive, this is only a presumption,
not a fact, and may therefore not be used as a basis for the creation of new rights.[14. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 238; Abu
Zahrah, Usul , p. 237; Badran, Usul , p. 223; Coulson, Succession , p. 198ff.] The question may arise: why can his heirs not inherit
from the mafqud ? If nothing is certain, perhaps his heirs could be assigned their shares, or the shares
may be reserved in their names until the facts are known. In response to this, the Hanafis invoke the
principle of "original absence", which means here that a right to inheritance is originally absent and will
be presumed so until there is positive proof that it has materialised.[15. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 180.]The Shafi'is and the Hanbalis have, on the other hand, validated istishab  in both its defensive ( li-daf )
and affirmative ( li-kasb ) capacities, that is, both as a shield and as a sword. Hence the mafqud  is
presumed to be alive in the same way as he was at the time of his disappearance right up to the time
when he is declared dead. The mafqud  is not only entitled to retain all his rights but can acquire new
rights such as gifts, inheritance and bequests. [16. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 237.]It thus appears that the jurists are in disagreement, not necessarily on the principle, but on the detailed
application of istishab . The Hanafis and Malikis who accept istishab  on a restricted basis have argued
that the existence of something in the past cannot prove that it continues to exist. They have further
pointed out that an over-reliance in istishab  is likely to open the door to uncertainty, even conflict, in
the determination of ahkam . The main area of juristic disagreement in this connection is the
identification of what exactly the original state which is presumed to continue by means of istishab
might be. This is a question which permeates the application of istishab  in its various capacities, which
is, perhaps, why the Hanbali scholar Ibn al-Qayyim is critical of over-reliance on istishab and of those
who have employed it more extensively than they should.[17. Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , I, 294.] The following
illustrations, which are given in the context of legal maxims that originate in istishab , also serve to

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 264show how the ulema have differed on the application of this doctrine to various issues. Some of the
well-known legal maxims which are founded in istishab  may be outlined as follows:
1) Certainty may not be disproved by doubt ( al-yaqin la yazul bi'l-shakk ). For example, when someone
is known to be sane, he will be presumed such until it is established that he has become insane. The
presumption can only be set aside with certainty, not by a mere doubt. Similarly, when a person eats in
the early morning during Ramadan while in doubt as to the possibility that he might have eaten after
dawn, his fast remains intact and no belated performance ( qada' ) is necessary by way of compensation.
To identify the two elements of the maxim under discussion, namely the certainty and doubt in this
example, night represents certainty whereas daybreak is the state of doubt, and the former prevails over
the latter. However, the same rule would lead us to a totally different result if it were applied to the
situation of a person who ends his fast late in the day in Ramadan while in doubt as to the occurrence of
sunset. In this case, his fast is vitiated and a belated performance would be required in compensation.
For the certainty which prevails here is the daytime which is presumed to continue, while the onset of
night is in doubt. To say that certainty prevails over doubt in this case means that the fast has been
terminated during the day, which is held to be the prevailing state of certainty.[18. Badran, Usul , pp. 220-221.]To illustrate some of the difficulties that are encountered in the implementation of the maxim under
discussion, we may give in example the case of a person who repudiates his wife by  talaq but is in
doubt as to the precise terms of his pronouncement: whether it amounted to a single or a triple talaq .
According to the majority of jurists, only a single talaq  takes place, which means that the husband is
still entitled to revocation ( rij'ah ) and may resume normal marital relations. Imam Malik has, on the
other hand, held that a triple talaq  takes place, which would preclude the right to revocation. The
difference between the majority opinion and that of Imam Malik arises from the variant interpretations
that they give to the question of certainty and doubt. The majority view presumes the marriage to be the
state of certainty which would continue until its dissolution is established by evidence. The doubt in this
case a the pronouncement of talaq . The doubtful talaq , according to the majority, may not be allowed to
disprove a certain fact. The marriage is certain and the talaq  a doubtful, hence the former is presumed
to continue.
Imam Malik, on the other hand, considers the occurrence of a divorce to be the certainty in this case.
What is in doubt is the husband's right to the revocation of the  talaq . As for determining the precise
number of talaqs , which is crucial to the question of revocation, Imam Malik holds that the right to
revocation cannot be established by a mere doubt. Hence the husband has no right to revocation, which
means that the divorce is final.[19. Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , I, 296; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 238.]While the majority of jurists consider marriage to be the certain factor in this case, for Imam Malik it is
the actual pronouncement of talaq , regardless of the form it might have taken, which represents the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 265state of certainty and the basis on which istishab  must operate. While commenting on these differences,
both Ibn al-Qayyim and Abu Zahrah have considered the majority decision to be preferable. The
marriage in this case must therefore not be allowed to be disproved by a doubtful talaq .[20. Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam ,
I, 296; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 238.]To give yet another example: when a man repudiates one of his two wives, but is not certain as to which
one, according to the Malikis the certain fact is that a talaq  has been pronounced, while the uncertainty
in this case is the identity of the divorcee. Both are divorced, on grounds of istishab , which establishes
that certainty must prevail over doubt. For the majority of ulema, however, the certain fact is that the
man has two wives, in other words, the existence of a valid marriage in respect of both. The doubt
concerning the identity of the divorcee must not be allowed to disprove the state of certainty, namely
the marriage. Hence neither of the two are divorced.[21. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 239.] Once again the juristic
disagreement in this case arises from the differential perception of the ulema as to identifying the state
of certainty on which the rules of istishab  must operate.
2) Presumption of generality until the general is subjected to limitation is another maxim that originates
in istishab . The general (` amm ) must therefore remain 'amm in its application until it is qualified in
some way.
Just as a general text remains general until it is specified, so is the validity of that text, which is
presumed to continue until it is abrogated. This would mean that a legal text remains valid and must be
implemented as such unless it is abrogated or replaced by another text.[22. Khudari, Usul , p. 356; Mahmassani, Falsafah ,
p. 90.] While discussing the maxim under discussion, al-Shawkani records the variant view which is held
by some ulema to the effect that the rule of law in these situations is established through the
interpretation of words and not by the application of istishab . [23. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 238.] To say that a text is
general or specified, or that a text remains valid and has not been abrogated, is thus determined on
grounds of interpretation of words and not by the application of istishab . For example, the Qur'anic rule
which assigns to the male a double share of the female in inheritance (al-Nisa, 4:11) is general and
would have remained so if it were not qualified by the Hadith that `the killer does not inherit'.[24. Ibn Majah,
Sunan , II, 913, Hadith no. 2735; al-Darimi, Sunan  (Kitab al-Fara'id ), II, 384.]Similarly, the ruling of the Sunnah  concerning the direction of the qiblah  remained in force until it was
abrogated by the Qur'anic injunction in Sura al-Baqarah (2:144), which changed the qiblah  from
Jerusalem to the Ka'bah. This is all obvious so far, and perhaps al-Shawkani is right in saying that there
is no need for a recourse to istishab  in these cases. What istishab  might tell us in this context may be
that in the event where there is doubt as to whether the general in the law has been qualified by some
other enactment, or when there is doubt as to whether the law on a certain point has been abrogated or
not, istishab  would presume the absence of specification and abrogation until the contrary is established
by evidence.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 2663) Presumption of original freedom from liability ( bara'ah al dhimmah al-asliyyah ), which means
freedom from obligations until the contrary is proved. No person may, therefore, be compelled to
perform any obligation unless the law requires so. For example, no-one is required to perform the hajj
pilgrimage more than once in his lifetime, or to perform a sixth salah  in one day, because the Shari'ah
imposes no such liability. Similarly, no-one is liable to punishment until his guilt is established through
lawful evidence.[25. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 238; Mahmassani, Falsafah , p. 90. The principle of original freedom from liability appears in al-Suyuti's al-
Ashbah wa al-Naza'ir and in the Majallah al-Ahkam al-`Adliyyah (Art. 8).] However, the detailed implementation of this principle
too has given rise to disagreement between the Shafi'i and Hanafi jurists. To give an example, A claims
that B owes him fifty dollars and B denies it. The question may arise as to whether a settlement ( sulh)
after denial is lawful in this case. The Hanafis have answered this in the affirmative, but the Shafi'is
have held that a settlement after denial is not permissible. The Shafi'is argue that since prior to the
settlement B denied the claim, the principle of original freedom from liability would thus apply to him,
which means that he would bear no liability at all. As such it would be unlawful for A to take anything
from B. The settlement is therefore null and void. The Hanafis have argued, on the other hand, that B's
non-liability after the claim is not inviolable. The claim, in other words, interferes with the operation of
the principle under discussion. B can no longer be definitely held to be free of liability; this being so, a
settlement is permissible in the interests of preventing hostility between the parties.[26. Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 180-l81. ]4) Permissibility is the original state of things ( al-asl fi al-ashya' al-ibahah ). We have already discussed
the principle of ibahah , which is a branch of the doctrine of istishab . To recapitulate, all matters which
the Shari'ah has not regulated to the contrary remain permissible. They will be presumed so unless the
contrary is proved to be the case. The one exception to the application of ibahah  is relationships
between members of the opposite sex, where the basic norm is prohibition unless it is legalised by
marriage. The Hanbalis have given  ibahah greater prominence, in that they validate it as a basis of
commitment ( iltizam ) unless there is a text to the contrary. Under the Hanbali doctrine, the norm in
`ibadat  is that they are void ( batil) unless there is an explicit command to validate them. But the norm
in regard to transactions and contracts is that they are valid unless there is a nass to the contrary.[27. Ibn al-
Qayyim, I`lam , I, 300.] To give an example, under the Hanbali doctrine of ibahah , prospective spouses are at
liberty to enter stipulations in their marriage contract, including a condition that the husband must
remain monogamous. The Hanbalis are alone in their ruling on this point, as the majority of jurists have
considered such a condition to amount to a superimposition on the legality of polygamy in the Shari'ah .
The provisions of the Shari'ah must, according to the majority, not be circumvented in this way. The
Lawgiver has permitted polygamy and it is not for the individual to overrule it. The Hanbalis have
argued, on the other hand, that the objectives of the Lawgiver in regard to marriage are satisfied by
monogamy. As it is, polygamy is a permissibility, not a requirement, and there is no nass to indicate
that the spouses could not stipulate against it. The stipulation is therefore valid and the spouses are
committed to abide by it.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 267ConclusionIstishab  is not an independent proof or a method of juristic deduction in its own right, but mainly
functions as a means of implementing an existing indication ( dalil) whose validity and continued
relevance are established by the rules of istishab . This might explain why the ulema have regarded
istishab  as the last ground of fatwa , one which does not command priority over other indications. The
Malikis have relied very little on it as they are known for their extensive reliance on other proofs, both
revealed and rational, in the development of the rules of Shari`ah ; so much so that they have had little
use for istishab . This is also true of the Hanafi school of law, which has only rarely invoked istishab  as
a ground for the determination of legal rules. Istishab  is applicable either in the absence of other proofs
or as a means of establishing the relevance of applying an existing proof. It is interesting to note in this
connection the fact that istishab  is more extensively applied by those who are particularly strict in their
acceptance of other rational proofs. Thus we find that the opponents of qiyas , such as the Zahiris and
the Akhbari branch of the Shi'ah Imamiyyah, have relied on it most and have determined the ahkam  on
its basis in almost all instances where the majority have applied qiyas . Similarly the Shafi`is who reject
istihsan  have relied more frequently on istishab than the Hanafis and the Malikis. In almost all cases
where the Hanafis and Malikis have applied istihsan  or custom ( 'urf), the Shafi'is have resorted to
istishab .[28. Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 241.]Istishab  is often described as a principle of evidence, as it is mainly concerned with the establishment or
rebuttal of facts, and as such it is of greater relevance to the rules of evidence. The application of
istishab  to penalties and to criminal law in general is to some extent restricted by the fact that these
areas are mainly governed by the definitive rules of Shari'ah  or statutory legislation. The jurists have on
the whole advised caution in the application of penalties on the basis of presumptive evidence only.
Having said this, however, the principle of the original absence of liability is undoubtedly an important
feature of istishab  which is widely upheld not only in the field of criminal law but also in constitutional
law and civil litigations generally. This is perhaps equally true of the principle of ibahah , which is an
essential component of the principle of legality, also known as the principle of the rule of law. This
feature of istishab  is once again in harmony with the modern concept of legality in that permissibility is
the norm in areas where the law imposes no prohibition.
I shall end this chapter by summarising a reformist opinion concerning istishab . In his booklet entitled
Tajdid Usul al-Fiqh al-Islami , Hasan Turabi highlights the significance of  istishab and calls for a fresh
approach to be taken toward this doctrine. The author explains that  istishab has the potential of
incorporating within its scope the concept of natural justice and the approved customs and mores of
society.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 268According to Turabi, istishab  derives its basic validity from the belief that Islam did not aim at
establishing a new life on earth in all of its dimensions and details, nor did it aim at nullifying and
replacing all the mores and customs of Arabian society. The Prophet did not take an attitude of
opposition to everything that he encountered, but accepted and allowed the bulk of the existing social
values and sought to reverse or replace only those which were oppressive and unacceptable. We also
find in the Qur'an references to amr bi al-'urf , or acting in accordance with the prevailing custom unless
it has been specifically nullified or amended by the Shari'ah  of Islam.
Similarly when the Qur'an calls for the implementation of justice, beneficence ( ihsan ) and fairness in
the determination of disputes, it refers, among other things, to the basic principles of justice that are
upheld by humanity at large and the good conscience of decent individuals. Life on earth is thus a
cumulative construct of moral and religious teachings, aided and abetted by enlightened human nature
which seeks to rectify what it deems to be wrong, unjust and undesirable. The Shari'ah  has also left
many things unregulated, and when this is the case human action may in regard to them be guided by
good conscience and the general teachings of divine revelation. This is the substance, as Turabi
explains, of the juridical doctrine of istishab . In its material part istishab  declares permissibility to be
the basic norm in Shari'ah ; that people are deemed to be free of liability unless the law has determined
otherwise; and that human beings may utilise everything in the earth for their benefit unless they are
forbidden by the law. It thus appears that istishab , as a proof of Shari'ah , merits greater prominence and
recognition than we find to be the case in the classical formulations of this doctrine.[29. Turabi, Tajdid , pp. 27-28. ]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 269Chapter Sixteen: Sadd al-Dhara'i`  (Blocking the Means)Dhari'ah  (pl. dhara'i' ) is a word synonymous with wasilah , which signifies the means to obtaining a
certain end, while sadd  literally means `blocking'. Sadd al-dhara'i ` thus implies blocking the means to
an expected end which is likely to materialise if the means towards it is not obstructed. Blocking the
means must necessarily be understood to imply blocking the means to evil, not to something good.
Although the literal meaning of sadd al-dhara'i ` might suggest otherwise, in its juridical application,
the concept of sadd al-dhara'i' also extends to `opening the means to beneficence'. But as a doctrine of
jurisprudence, it is the former meaning, that is, blocking the means to evil, which characterises sadd al-
dhara'i `. The latter meaning of this expression is not particularly highlighted in the classical expositions
of this doctrine, presumably because opening the means to beneficence is the true purpose and function
of the Shari'ah  as a whole and as such is not peculiar to  sadd al-dhara'i'.
When the means and the end are both directed toward beneficence and maslahah  and are not explicitly
regulated by a clear injunction ( nass), the matter is likely to fall within the ambit of qiyas , maslahah , or
istihsan , etc. Similarly, when both the means and the end are directed towards evil, the issue is likely to
be governed by the general rules of Shari'ah , and a recourse to sadd al-dhara'i' would seem out of
place. Based on this analysis, it would appear that as a principle of jurisprudence, sadd al-dhara'i'
applies when there is a discrepancy between the means and the end on the good-neutral-evil scale of
values. A typical case for the application of sadd al-dhara'i ` would thus arise when a lawful means is
expected to lead to an unlawful result, or when a lawful means which normally leads to a lawful result
is used to procure an unlawful end.
Both the means and the end may be good or evil, physical or moral, and they may be visible or
otherwise, and the two need not necessarily be present simultaneously. For example, khalwah  or illicit
privacy between members of the opposite sexes, is unlawful because it constitutes a means to zina
whether or not it actually leads to it. All sexual overtures which are expected to lead to zina are
similarly forbidden by virtue of the certainty or likelihood that the conduct in question would lead to
zina. Dhari'ah  may also consist of the omission of a certain conduct such as trade and commercial
transactions during the of the Friday congregational prayer. The means which obstruct the said prayer,
in other words, must be blocked, that is, by abandoning trade at the specified time.
The whole concept of sadd al-dhara'i' is founded in the idea of preventing an evil before it actually
materialises. It is therefore not always necessary that the result should actually obtain. It is rather the
objective expectation that a means is likely to lead to an evil result which renders the means in question
unlawful even without the realisation of the expected result. This is the case in both the examples given

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 270above: khalwah  is thus unlawful even without actually leading to zina, and trading during the time of
the Friday prayer is unlawful whether or not it actually hinders the latter. Furthermore, since sadd al-
dhara'i' basically contemplates preventing an evil before its occurrence, the question of intention to
procure a particular result cannot be a reliable basis for assessing the means that leads to that result.
Abu Zahrah has aptly observed that the nature and value of the means is determined by looking at the
purpose that it pursues regardless as to whether the latter is intended or otherwise. When a particular act
is deemed to lead to a certain result, whether good or evil, it is held to be the means toward that end.
The question of the intention of the perpetrator is, as such, not relevant to the objective determination of
the value of the means. It is rather the expected result which determines the value of the means. If the
result is expected to be good and praiseworthy, so will be the means towards it, and if it is expected to
be blameworthy the same will apply to the means regardless of the intention of the perpetrator, or the
actual realisation of the result itself. This is, for example, borne out by the Qur'anic text which forbids
the Muslims from insulting idol worshippers, notwithstanding the inherent enormity of idol-
worshipping or the actual intention behind it. The text thus proceeds: 'And insult not the associators lest
they [in return] insult God out of spite and ignorance' (al-An'am; 6:108). The means to an evil is thus
obstructed by putting a ban on insulting idol-worshippers, a conduct which might have been otherwise
permissible and even praiseworthy, as it would mean denunciation of falsehood and firmness of faith on
the part of the believer. Thus a means which is intrinsically praiseworthy leads to an evil result, and
acquires the value of the latter. Furthermore, the prohibition in this example is founded on the
likelihood that the associators would insult God as a result. It is, in other words, the expected result
which is taken into account. Whether the latter actually materialises or not is beside the point: insulting
the idols and their worshippers is thus forbidden regardless of the actual result that such conduct may
lead to. Similarly, the question of intending whether or not to bring about a particular result is irrelevant
to the prohibition under discussion. Insulting idol worshippers is thus forbidden even when a Muslim
does not intend to bring about the expected result, that is, an insult to God; his intention may be good or
bad, in either case, insulting the idols and their worshippers is forbidden as it is, on an objective basis,
most likely to invoke the expected result.[1. Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 228.]The doctrine of sadd al-dhara'i ` contemplates the basic objectives of the Lawgiver. Hence the general
rule regarding the value of the means in relationship to the end is that the former acquires the value of
the latter. Al-Shatibi has aptly observed that the Lawgiver has legalised certain forms of conduct and
prohibited others in accordance with the benefit or harm that they lead to. When a particular act or form
of conduct brings about a result which is contrary to the objectives of the Lawgiver, then the latter
would be held to prevail over the former.[2. Shatibi, Muwafaqat  (Diraz edition), IV, 194.] If the means, in other words,
violate the basic purpose of the Shari'ah , then they must be blocked. The laws of Shari'ah  are for the
most part distinguishable in regard to their objectives ( maqasid ), and the means which procure or
obstruct those objectives. The means are generally viewed in the light of the ends they are expected to
obtain, and it is logically the latter which prevail over the former in that the means follow their ends,
not vice versa. Normally the means to wajib  become wajib  and the means to haram  become haram .

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 271Means may at times lead to both a good and an evil in which case, if the evil ( mafsadah ) is either equal
to or greater than the benefit ( maslahah ), the former will prevail over the latter. This is according to the
general principle that 'preventing an evil takes priority over securing a benefit'.[3. Shatibi, Muwafaqat  (Diraz edition),
IV, 195; Badran, Usul , p. 242.] Sadd al-dhara'i ` thus becomes a principle of jurisprudence and a method of
deducing the juridical ruling ( hukm shar`i ) of a certain issue or type of conduct which may not leave
been regulated in the existing law but whose ruling can be deduced through the application of this
principle.
In addition to the Qur'anic ayah  (al-An'am, 6:108) on the prohibition of insulting idols as referred to
above, the ulema have quoted in authority for sadd al-dhara'i ` the Qur'anic passage in sura al-Baqarah
(2:104), as follows: 'O believers! Address not the Prophet by the word ra'ina , but address him
respectfully and listen to him.' The reason for this prohibition was that the word ' ra`ina ', being a
homonym, had two meanings, one of which was 'please look at us or attend to us', while with a slight
twist the same word would mean 'our shepherd'. The Jews used to insult the Prophet with it, and in
order to block the means to such abuse, the Muslims were forbidden from using that form of address to
the Prophet despite their good intentions and the fact that the word under discussion was not inherently
abusive.[4. Cf. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.228; Isma'il, Adillah , p 197.]Authority is also found for the principle of sadd al-dhara'i' in the Sunnah , especially the ruling in which
the Prophet forbade a creditor from taking a gift from his debtor lest it became a means to usury and the
gift a substitute to  riba . The Prophet also forbade the killing of hypocrites ( al-munafiqun ) and people
who were known to have betrayed the Muslim community during battles. It was feared that killing such
people would become a means to evil, namely, of giving rise to a rumour that 'Muhammad kills his own
Companions' [5. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 62; Shatibi, Fiqh , p. 187.] which would, in turn, provide the enemy with an
excuse to undermine the unity of the Muslim community. Consequently the Prophet put a ban on killing
the munafiqun . On a similar note, the Prophet suspended enforcement of the hadd  penalty for theft
during battles so as to avoid defection to enemy forces. It was for this reason, namely to block the
means to an evil, that the army commanders were ordered not to enforce tire prescribed penalties during
military engagements.[6. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 229; Shalabi, Fiqh , p.187; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 200.]The leading Companions are also known to have entitled to inheritance the divorced woman whom her
husband had irrevocably divorced during his death illness in order to exclude her from inheritance. This
was forbidden by the Companions so that a divorce of this kind would not become a means to abuse. It
is also reported that during the time of the caliph Umar b. al-Khattab, one of his officials, Hudhayfah,
married a Jewish women in al-Mada'in. The caliph wrote to him saying that he should divorce her.
Hudhayfah then asked the caliph if the marriage was unlawful. To this the Caliph replied that it was not,
but that his example might be followed by others who might be lured by the beauty of the women of ahl
al-dhimmah . The caliph thus forbade something which the Qur'an had declared lawful so as to block the
means to an evil as he perceived it at the time. It might be interesting to add here that Ibn Qayyim al-

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 272Jawziyyah records at least seventy-seven instances and rulings of the learned Companions and the
subsequent generations of ulema in which they resorted to sadd al-dhara'i `so as to block the means
that led to evil.[7. Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, I`lam , III, 122ff; Sha labi, Fiqh , p.188.]The ulema are, however, in disagreement over the validity of sadd al-dhara'i `. The Hanafi and Shafi'i
jurists do not recognise it as a principle of jurisprudence in its own right, on the grounds that the
necessary ruling regarding the means can be derived by recourse to other principles such as qiyas , and
the Hanafi doctrines of istihsan  and 'urf. But the Maliki and Hanbali jurists have validated sadd al-
dhara'i ` as a proof of Shari'ah  in its own right. Despite the different approaches that the ulema have
taken to this doctrine, the Maliki jurist al-Shatibi has reached the conclusion that the ulema of various
schools are essentially in agreement over the conceptual validity of sadd al-dhara'i ` but have differed in
its detailed application. Their differences relate mainly to the grounds which may be held to constitute
the means to something else, and also to the extent to which the concept of sadd al-dhara'i ` can be
validly applied.[8. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 201. ] Abu Zahrah has reached essentially the same conclusion by
observing that the Shafi'i and Hanafi jurists are for the most part in agreement with their Maliki and
Hanbali counterparts, and that they differ only in regard to some issues.[9. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp.227-228.] The
following classification of sadd al-dhara'i' may cast light on the consensus, as well as some of the areas
which the ulema are in disagreement, over the application of this doctrine. It is perhaps well to
remember at this point that notwithstanding the application of sadd al-dhara'i' in respect of opening the
means to beneficence ( maslahah ), it is usually the prevention of evil ( mafsadah ) that acquires greater
prominence in the discussion of this principle.
From the viewpoint of the degree of probability or otherwise that a means is expected to lead to an evil
end, the ulema of usul have divided the dhara'i` into four types.
1 ) Means which definitely lead to evil, such as digging a deep pit next to the entrance door to a public
place which is not lit at night, so that anyone who enters the door is very likely to fall into it. Based on
the near-certainty of the expected result of injuring others, the means which leads to that result are
equally forbidden. The ulema of all schools are, in principle, unanimous on the prohibition of this type
of dhari'ah  and a consensus ( ijma`) is said to have been reached on this point.[10. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 228; Badran,
Usul , p. 243.] Having said this, however, it should be added that the jurists have envisaged two possible
eventualities. Firstly, the dhari`ah may consist of an unlawful act of transgression in the first place, as
was the case in the foregoing example, in which case the perpetrator is held to be responsible for any
loss or damage that might be caused, as by digging a pit in a place where he has no right or authority to
do so. Secondly, the dhari'ah  may consist of an act which is basically lawful, in which case the ulema
have disagreed over the question of responsibility. If, for example, someone digs a water well in his
own house but so close to the wall of his neighbour that the wall collapses as a result, the act here is
held to be basically lawful as it consists of the exercise of the right of ownership, which is said to be
irreconcilable with the idea of liability for damages. According to a variant view, however, the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 273perpetrator is liable for damages. This ruling draws support from the principle, already referred to, that
preventing an evil takes priority over securing a benefit.[11. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 230; Badran, Usul , p. 243.]2) The second type of means is that which is most likely (i.e. on the basis of al-zann al ghalib ) to lead
to evil and is rarely, if ever, expected to lead to a benefit. An example of this would be selling weapons
during warfare or selling grapes to a wine maker. Although al-Shatibi has noted that these transactions
are invalid according to the consensus ( ijma`) of the ulema, both Abu Zahrah and Badran have noted
that it is only the Maliki and Hanbali ulema who have considered these transactions to be forbidden
(haram ), as they are most likely to lead to evil notwithstanding the absence of certain knowledge that
this will always be the case. In their opinion, a dominant probability or zann  is generally accepted as a
valid basis for the ahkam  of Shari'ah . Consequently when there is a strong likelihood that means would
lead to an evil, the means may be declared forbidden on the basis of this probability alone.[12. Abu Zahrah,
Usul , p. 231; Badran, Usul , p. 244.]3) The third of the four types of means under discussion is that which frequently leads to evil, but in
which there is no certainty, nor even a dominant probability, that this will always be the case. An
example of this would be a sale which is used as a means to procuring usury ( riba). These types of
sales, generally known as  buyu' al-ajal (deferred sales), in which either the delivery of the object of
sale, or the payment of its price, is deferred to a later date, would all tend to fall under this category of
means. If, for example, A sells a garment for ten rials to B with the price being payable in six months'
time, and A then buys the same garment from B for eight rials with the price being payable
immediately, this transaction in effect amounts to a loan of eight rials to B on which he pays an interest
of two rials after six months. There is a dominant probability that this sale would lead to riba although
there is an element of uncertainty that it may not, which is why the ulema have disagreed as to the
validity or otherwise of this type of transaction. Imam Malik and Ahmad b. Hanbal have held that the
means which are likely to lead to usury are unlawful ( haram ) and must be obstructed. They have
acknowledged the possibility that a deferred sale may not actually lead to riba; they also take
cognizance of the basic norm in regard to sale, which is legality, and yet they have ruled, on grounds of
caution ( ihtiyat ), that sales which are likely to lead to  riba are unlawful. The mere possibility that riba
may not actually materialise is of no account, and although sale is generally lawful, this basic legality is
of no consequence if it is expected to procure an evil. Furthermore, to prevent the latter must be given
priority over any possible benefit that the sale in question might entail.
The Imams Abu Hanifah and al-Shafi'i have, on the other hand, ruled that unless it definitely leads to
evil, the basic legality of sale must be held to prevail. Sale is basically lawful in all of it varieties,
deferred or otherwise, and in the absence of either positive knowledge ( 'ilm) or of a dominant zann  that
a sale would lead to riba, a mere frequency of occurrence should not be allowed to override the original
legality of sale. The preferred view, however, is that of the Maliki and Hanbali schools, for there is
evidence in the Sunnah  to the effect that original permissibility may be overruled in the face of a

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 274likelihood (or customary practice), even without definite evidence, that it might open the way to evil.[13.
Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 200; Badran, Usul , p. 244; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 232.]The ulema have similarly differed over the validity or otherwise of a marriage that is concluded with
the intention of merely satisfying one's sexual desire without a life-long commitment. Imam Malik
considers this to be invalid ( batil), as acts, according to this view, are to be judged by the intention
behind them, and since the norm in marriage is permanence, the absence of an intention to that effect
vitiates the nikah . The main thrust of this view is to prevent the likely abuse to which the marriage in
question is likely to lead. Imam Shafi`i has on the other hand held that the nikah  is valid so long as there
is nothing in the contract to vitiate it. The Shari'ah , according to this view, cannot operate on the hidden
intentions of people but only on tangible facts that are susceptible to proof. Whether the nikah  in this
case is a means to abuse is a matter for the conscience of the individual, and not the positive application
of the law.[14. Isma'il, Adillah , p. 175.] The difference here is one of perspective. Whereas the Shafi'i and Hanafi
view is based on the apparent validity of a contract, the Maliki and Hanbali view takes into
consideration the objective of a contract and the necessary caution that must be taken in order to
prevent an evil.[15. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 231.] The ulema are, on the other hand, all in agreement on the
prohibition of illicit privacy ( khalwah ) which is founded in the likelihood, though not amounting to
positive proof, that it might lead to adultery.[16. Badran, Usul , p. 245.]Another, similar instance in which the jurists have invoked the principle of sadd al-dhara'i` is the
ruling, disputed by some, that close relatives may neither act as witnesses nor as judges in each other's
disputes. Likewise, a judge may not adjudicate a dispute on the basis of his personal knowledge of facts
without the formal presentation of evidence, lest it lead to prejudice in favour or against one of the
parties. The principle involved here is that such activities might constitute the means to an evil end,
namely miscarriage of justice, and are therefore to be avoided. The Hanafis on the other hand maintain,
particularly in reference to adjudication on the basis of personal knowledge, that it is lawful. Some
ulema have also held the view that testimony by a relative may in fact facilitate justice and may not lead
to evil, especially if relations testify against each other, which is why the ulema of various schools have
allowed the testimony of father or son, or of spouses, against one another, but not in favour.[17. Shalabi, Fiqh ,
p. 186; Badran, Usul , p. 244; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 211.] The jurists have thus disagreed over the application of sadd al-
dhara'i ` to particular issues and the extent to which it may be validly applied to different situations.
4) The last of the four varieties of means are those which are rarely expected to lead to evil and are
most likely to lead to a benefit. An example of this would be to dig a water well in a place which is not
likely to cause injury or harm to anyone, or speaking a word of truth to a tyrannical ruler or growing
certain varieties of fruits, such as grapes, on one's own property. In all of these, as in many other
matters, there is a possibility that a mafsadah  might be caused as a result. In the case of growing grapes,
for example, it is possible that the fruit may be fermented into wine, but a mere possibility of this kind
is overlooked in view of the stronger likelihood of the benefit that it would otherwise achieve. The

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 275ulema are generally in agreement on the permissibility of this type of means. The basic norm in regard
to acts and transactions that would fall under this category of means is permissibility, and no one may
be prevented from attempting them on account of the mere possibility that they may lead to a mafsadah .
On a similar note, no-one may be prevented from giving testimony in judicial disputes, nor may anyone
be obstructed from telling the truth to a tyrannical ruler because of a mere possibility that this might
give rise to a mafsadah .[18. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , II, 249; Badran, Usul , p. 245; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 230.]The foregoing discussion of sadd al-dhara'i ` has primarily been concerned with means which led to an
unlawful end. There was, in other words, no attempt to change the haram  into halal : whenever there
was a likelihood that a lawful means led to an unlawful end, the means itself became unlawful. But the
application of sadd al-dhara'i' also covers the eventuality where a haram  may be turned into halal  or
mubah  if this is likely to present a greater evil. A lesser evil is, in other words, tolerated in order to
prevent a greater one. To give an example: it is permissible to seek the release of Muslim prisoners of
war in exchange for the payment of a monetary ransom. To give money to the warring enemy is
basically unlawful as it adds strength to the enemy, which is generally harmful. But it is permitted here
as it achieves the freedom of Muslim prisoners, which would in turn add to the strength of the Muslim
forces. This ruling is based in the principle of sadd al-dhara'i' , and consists of opening, rather than
blocking, the means to the desired benefit. On a similar note, it is permissible for the Muslim
community to pay the enemy so as to prevent the latter from inflicting harm on the Muslims, but only
when the Muslim community is otherwise powerless to defend itself. Furthermore, the ulema have
generally held that giving bribes is permissible if it is the only way to prevent oppression, and the
victim is otherwise unable to defend himself. To this the Hanbali and Maliki jurists have added the
proviso that giving bribes is only permissible as a means of defending one's proven rights but not if the
right in question is disputed.[19. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 232.]Notwithstanding the essential validity of sadd al-dhara'i' as a principle of Shari'ah , over-reliance on it
is not recommended. The ulema have cautioned that an excessive use of this principle may render the
lawful ( mubah ) or even the praiseworthy ( mandub ) and the obligatory ( wajib ) unlawful, which should
not be encouraged. An example of this would be when an upright person refuses to take custody of the
property of the orphan, or of waqf property, for the pious motive of avoiding the possibility of incurring
a sin. A refusal of this nature would seem to over-emphasise the significance of the means that might
lead to evil. With regard to the guardianship of the property of orphans, the Qur'an offers some
guidance in that it permits mixing their property with that of the guardian as a matter of trust, a
conclusion which is drawn from the text where we read in a reference to the orphans: 'If you mix their
affairs with years, they are your brethren, but God knows the wrong-doer from the upright' (al-Baqarah,
2:220).
While discussing the ulema's caution against over-reliance on sadd al-dhara'i `, Abu Zahrah quotes the
renowned Maliki jurist Ibn al-'Arabi, to the effect that the application of this principle should be

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 276regulated so as to ensure propriety and moderation in its use. Abu Zahrah then concurs with Ibn al-
`Arabi to the effect that if an evil is to be prevented by blocking the means towards it, one must
ascertain that the evil in question is mansus `alayh , that is, one which has been ruled upon as such in the
Qur'an or the Sunnah . Similarly, when a benefit is to be facilitated by opening the means towards it, the
propriety of the benefit must be sustainable by analogy to a halal mansus (that which has been declared
lawful in the nass). But Abu Zahrah is careful to add that these conditions remain in the nature of an
opinion and are not required in the accepted Maliki exposition of this doctrine`[20. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 233.]And finally, with regard to the guardianship of property and trust in the foregoing example, it is
suggested that the harm which is likely to arise from refusal by an upright person to undertake it is
likely to be greater than that which might arise from undertaking it. If the orphans were to be neglected
for fear of opening the means to misuse of trust, or if no-one gave testimony for fear of indulging in
lying, then surely this would itself become a means to greater evil and should therefore be avoided.
We might end our discussion of sadd al-dhara'i ` by distinguishing the means from the preliminary
(muqaddimah ), although the two can at times coincide and overlap. Briefly, a 'preliminary' consists of
something which is necessary for obtaining the result that it contemplates, in the sense that the latter
cannot materialise without the former. For instance, ablution ( wudu' ) is a preliminary to salah  and the
latter cannot be performed without the former. But a means to something does not stand in the same
relationship to its end. Although the means is normally expected to lead to the end it contemplates, the
latter may also be obtained through some other means. The end, in other words, is not exclusively
dependent on the means. To give an example: traveling in order to commit a theft is a preliminary to the
theft that it contemplates but not a means to it. Traveling which might consist of riding a train in a
certain direction is basically neutral and cannot, on an objective basis, be said to constitute a means to
theft. But tahlil , that is, an intervening marriage concluded in order to legalise remarriage between a
divorced couple, is a means to the proposed marriage but not a preliminary to it, as the latter is not
exclusively dependent on tahlil and can, for example, follow a normal intervening marriage. Similarly,
seductive overtures between members of the opposite sexes are a means, but not a preliminary, to
adultery, as the latter can materialise even without such overtures. Sexual overtures can only constitute
a preliminary to zina when they actually lead to it.
The other difference to note between the means and the preliminary for our purposes, is, as already
indicated, that the former is usually evaluated and declared unlawful on an objective basis even without
the realisation of its expected end. The preliminary to an act, on the other hand, is of little value without
the actual occurrence of the act of which it becomes a part. The relationship between preliminary and its
result is subjective in the sense that it can only be evaluated in the light of the completed or the intended
result. Walking in the direction of a mosque to perform the Friday prayers, for example, can only
acquire the value of the wajib  if it actually leads to the performance of the prayers, not otherwise.[21. Cf.
Badran, Usul , pp. 245-246; Isma'il, Adillah , p. 171.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 277

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 278Chapter Seventeen: Hukm Shar`i (Law or Value of Shari'ah )The ulema of usul define hukm shar`i as a locution or communication from the Lawgiver concerning
the conduct of the mukallaf (person in full possession of his faculties) which consists of a demand, an
option or an enactment A demand ( talab , or iqtida' ) is usually communicated in the form of either a
command or a prohibition. The former demands that the mukallaf do something, whereas the latter
requires him to avoid doing something. A demand may either be binding, which leaves the mukallaf
with no choice but to conform, or may not be binding. When a demand to do or not to do something is
established by definitive proof ( dalil qat'i ) it is referred to as wajib  or haram  respectively. Such is the
majority view, but according to the Hanafi jurists, if the text which conveys such a demand is not
definitive in its meaning ( dalalah ) or authenticity ( thubut ), it is wajib , but if it is definitive in both
respects, it is fard. As for the demand to avoid doing something, the Hanafis maintain that if it is based
on definitive proof in terms of both meaning and authenticity, it is haram , otherwise it is makruh
tahrimi . When a demand is not utterly emphatic and leaves the individual with an element of choice it is
known as mandub  (recommended). The option ( takhyir ), on the other hand, is a variety of hukm shar'i
which leaves the individual at liberty either to do or to avoid doing something. A hukm  of this kind is
commonly known as mubah  (permissible). An enactment, or wad`, is neither a demand nor an option,
but an objective exposition of the law which enacts something as a cause ( sabab ) or a condition ( shart )
of obtaining something else; or it may be conveyed in the form of a hindrance ( mani `) that might
operates an obstacle against obtaining it.[1. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 42; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 6; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 100. ]To give some examples, the Qur'anic command which addresses the believers to `fulfill your contracts'
(al-Ma'idah, 5:1) is a speech of the Lawgiver addressed to the mukallaf  which consists of a particular
demand. A demand addressed to the mukallaf  which conveys a prohibition may be illustrated by
reference to the Qur'anic text which provides: 'O you believers, let not some people ridicule others, for
it is possible that the latter are better than the former [ ...]' (al-Hujurat, 49:11). To illustrate a hukm
which conveys an option, we refer to the Qur'anic text which permits the believers to 'hunt when you
have come out of the state of ihram ' (sacred state entered into for the purpose of performing the  hajj
pilgrimage) (al -Ma'idah, 5:2). Another Qur'anic text which consists of an option occurs in sura al-
Baqarah (2:229) which provides: `If you fear that they [i.e. the spouses] would be unable to observe the
limits set by God, then there would be no sin on them if she gives a consideration for her freedom.' The
married couple are thus given the choice to incur a divorce by mutual consent, known as khul' , if they
so wish, but they are under no obligation if they do not. Another form of option which occurs to the
Qur'an may be illustrated with reference to the expiation ( kaffarah ) of erroneous killing. The perpetrator
has here been given the choice either to set a slave free, or feed sixty destitute, or fast for two
consecutive months (al-Nisa', 4:92). The following Hadith also conveys a hukm  in which the individual

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 279is given a choice. The Hadith reads: 'If any of you sees something evil, he should set it right by his
hand; If he is unable to do so, then by his tongue; and if he is unable to do even that, then within his
heart- but this is the weakest form of faith.'[2. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p.16, Hadith no.34.]Here the choice is given according to the ability of the mukallaf and the circumstances which might
influence his decision. Lastly, to illustrate a  hukm which consists of an enactment ( wad') we may refer
to the Hadith which provides that 'the killer does not inherit'.[3. Shafi'i, Risalah , p. 80; Ibn Majah, Sunan , II, 913, Hadith no.
2735.]This is a speech of the Lawgiver concerning the conduct of the mukallaf  which is neither a demand nor
an option but an objective ruling of the law that envisages a certain eventuality.
The ulema of usul have differed with the fuqaha' in regard to the identification of hukm shar`i . To refer
back to the first example where we quoted the Qur'an concerning the fulfillment of contracts; according
to the ulema of usul, the text itself, that is, the demand which is conveyed in the text, represents the
hukm shar'i . However, according to the fuqaha' , it is the effect of that demand, namely the obligation
(wujub ) that it conveys which embodies the hukm shar`i . To give another example, the Qur'anic
prohibition which provides in an address to the believers: 'Do not approach adultery' (al-Isra', 17:32), is
itself the embodiment of the hukm shar`i , according to the ulema of usul. But according to the fuqaha , it
is the effect of the demand in this ayah , namely the prohibition ( tahrim ) which represents the hukm
shari . Similarly, the Qur'anic text in respect of the permissibility of hunting which we earlier quoted is
itself the embodiment of the hukm shar`i according to the ulema of usul, but it is the effect of that text,
namely the permissibility ( ibahah ) which is the hukm  according to the fuqaha' . Having explained this
difference of perspective between the ulema of usul and the fuqaha' , it will be noted, however, that it is
of no practical consequence concerning the rulings of the Shari'ah , in that the two aspects of hukm  that
they highlight are to all intents and purposes concurrent.[4. Khallaf, ` Ilm, 100; Khudari, Usul , p. 18; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p.58. ]Hukm shar'i  is divided into the two main varieties of al-hukm al-taklifi (defining law) and al-hukm al-
wad'i (declaratory law). The former consists of a demand or an option, whereas the latter consists of an
enactment only. `Defining Law' is a fitting description of al-hukm al-taklifi , as it mainly defines the
extent of man's liberty of action. Al-hukm al-wad'i is rendered 'declaratory law', as this type of hukm
mainly declares the legal relationship between the cause ( sabab ) and its effect ( musabbab ) or between
the condition ( shart ) and its object ( mashrut )[5. Cf. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 193, for the use of English terminology.].
Defining law may thus be described as a locution or communication from the Lawgiver which demands
the mukallaf  to do something or forbids him from doing something, or gives him an option between the
two. This type of hukm  occurs in the well-known five categories of wajib  (obligatory), mandub
(recommended), haram  (forbidden), makruh  (abominable) and mubah  (permissible). Declaratory law is
also subdivided into the five categories of sabab  (cause), shart (condition), mani' (hindrance), ` azimah

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 280(strict law) as opposed to rukhsah  (concessionary law), and sahih  (valid) as opposed to batil (null and
void).[6. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 101; Qasim, Usul , p. 213.] We shall discuss the defining law and its various sub-divisions first.I. Defining Law ( al-hukm al-Taklifi )As stated above, `defining law' is a locution or communication from the Lawgiver addressed to the
mukallaf  which consists of a demand or of an option; it occurs in the five varieties of wajib , mandub ,
haram , makruh  and mubah . We shall discuss each of these separately, as follows.I.1 The Obligatory ( Wajib , Fard )For the majority of ulema, wajib  and fard are synonymous, and both convey an imperative and binding
demand of the Lawgiver addressed to the mukallaf  in respect of doing something. Acting upon
something wajib  leads to reward, while omitting it leads to punishment in this world or in the hereafter.
The Hanafis have, however, drawn a distinction between wajib  and fard. An act is thus obligatory in the
first degree, that is, fard, when the command to do it is conveyed in a clear and definitive text of the
Qur'an or Sunnah . But if the command to do something is established in a speculative ( zanni ) authority,
such as an Ahad  Hadith, the act would be obligatory in the second degree ( wajib ). The obligatory
commands to perform the salah , the hajj, and to obey one's parents are thus classified under fard, as
they are each established in a definitive text of the Quran. But the obligation to recite sura al-Fatihah in
salah , or to perform salat al-witr , that is, the three units of prayers which conclude the late evening
prayers ( salat al-'isha' ), are on the other hand classified under wajib , as they are both established in the
authority of Hadith whose authenticity is not completely free of doubt. A Muslim is bound to do acts
which are obligatory either in the first or in the second degree; if he does them, he secures reward and
spiritual merit, but if he willfully neglects them, he makes himself liable to punishment. The difference
between the two classes of obligations, according to the vast majority of the jurists, including the
Hanafis, is that the person who refuses to believe in the binding nature of a command which is
established by definitive proof becomes an unbeliever, but not if he disputes the authority of an
obligatory command of the second degree, although he becomes a transgressor. Thus to neglect one's
obligation to support one's wife, children and poor parents amounts to a sin but not to infidelity.[7. Abu 'Id,
Mabahith , p. 63; Qasim, Usul , p. 216; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 197.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 281Another consequence of the distinction between fard and wajib  is that when the former is neglected in
an act required by the Shari'ah , the act as a whole becomes null and void ( batil). If. for example, a
person leaves out the bowing ( ruku`) or prostration ( sajdah ) in obligatory prayers, the whole of the
prayer becomes null and void. But if he leaves out the recitation of al-Fatihah, the salah  is basically
valid, albeit deficient. This is the Hanafi view, but according to the majority the salah  is null and void
in both cases. However, the difference between the Hanafis and the majority in this respect is regarded
as one of form rather than substance, in that the consequences of their disagreement are on the whole
negligible.[8. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 23-24; Abu `Id, Mabahith , p. 63.] Al-Ghazali is representative of the majority opinion,
including that of the Shafi'is, when he writes: `As far as we are concerned, there is no difference
between fard and wajib ; the two terms are synonymous. According to the Hanafis, fard is based on
definitive authority but wajib  is founded in speculative proof. Once again, we do not deny the division
of wajib into definitive and speculative ( maqtu' wa-maznun ) and there is no objection to the rise of
different expressions once their meaning is clear.'[9. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I. 42. ]Wajib  is sub-divided into at least three varieties, the first of which is the division of wajib  into personal
('ayni ) and collective ( kafa'i ). Wajib `ayni is addressed to every individual sui juris and cannot, in
principle, be performed for or on behalf of another person. Examples of wajib  (or fard) 'ayni are salah ,
hajj, zakah , fulfillment of contract and obedience to one's parents. Wajib kafa'i consists of obligations
that are addressed to the community as a whole. If only some members of the community perform
them, the law is satisfied and the rest of the community is absolved of it. For example, the duty to
participate in jihad  (holy struggle), funeral prayers, the hisbah , (promotion of good and prevention of
evil), building hospitals, extinguishing fires, giving testimony and serving as a judge, etc., are all
collective obligations of the community, and are thus wajib  (or fard) kafa'i . Thus when a person dies
leaving no property to meet the cost of his burial, it is the wajib kafa'i of the community to provide it
and to give him a decent burial. Only some members of the community may actually contribute toward
the costs, but the duty is nevertheless discharged from the whole of the community. The merit ( thawab ),
however, only attaches to those who have actually taken part in discharging the wajib kafa'i duty.
The collective obligation sometimes changes into a personal obligation. This is, for example, the case
with regard to jihad , which is a wajib kafa'i , although when the enemy attacks and besieges a locality it
becomes the personal duty of every resident to defend it. Similarly, when there is only one mujtahid  in a
city, it becomes his personal duty to carry out ijtihad .[10. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 109; Qasim, Usul , p.218; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p.69.]Wajib  is also divided into wajib muwaqqat , that is, wajib  which is contingent on a time-limit and wajib
mutlaq , that is, 'absolute wajib ', which is free of such a limitation. Fasting and the obligatory salah  are
examples of contingent wajib , as they must each be observed within specified time limits. But
performing the hajj or the payment of an expiation ( kaffarah ) are not subject to such restrictions and are
therefore absolute wajib . Provided that one performs the hajj once during one's lifetime and pays the
kaffarah  at any time before one dies, the duty is discharged.[11. The Mu'tazilah have held the view that a flexibility of this kind

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 282negates the whole concept of wujub , as in their view wajib  precludes the element of choice altogether. But the majority of ulema refute this by saying that there is
no necessary contradiction in dividing the wajib  into wajib muwaqqat and wajib mutlaq . For details see Ghazali, Musta sfa, I, 43-44.] Furthermore, the
absolute wajib  is called absolute because there is no time-limit on its performance and it may be
fulfilled every time whenever the occasion arises. This is, for example, the case regarding one's duty to
obey one's parents, or the obligation to carry out hisbah , namely, to promote good and to prevent of evil
as and when the occasion arises.
A consequence of this division is that wajib muwaqqat materialises only when the time is due for it; it
may neither be hastened nor delayed, but within the given time limits the mukallaf  has a measure of
flexibility. Furthermore, to fulfill a contingent wajib  it is necessary that the mukallaf  have the intention
(niyyah ) specifically to discharge it.[12. Khudari, Usul , p.33; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 108.]Lastly, the wajib  is divided into quantified wajib  (wajib muhaddad ) and unquantified wajib  (wajib
ghayr muhaddad ). An example of the former is salah , zakah , payment of the price ( thaman ) by the
purchaser in a sale transaction, and payment of rent in accordance with the terms of a tenancy
agreement, all of which are quantified. Similarly, enforcement of the prescribed penalties ( hudud ) falls
under the rubric of wajib muhaddad in the sense that the hadd  penalties are all specified in terms of
quantity. The unquantified wajib  may be illustrated by reference to one's duty to support one's close
relatives, charity to the poor, feeding the hungry, paying a dower, ( mahr ) to one's wife, the length of
standing ( qiyam ), bowing and prostration in salah , wiping the head in ablution ( wudu' ) and quantifying
the ta'zir penalties for offences which are punishable but in regard to which the Lawgiver has not
quantified the punishment. (It is for the judge to quantify the punishment in light of the individual
circumstances of the offender and the offence.) Consequently, the mukallaf , be it the individual
believer, the qadi or the imam, enjoys the flexibility to determine the quantitative aspect of the
unquantified wajib  himself.[13. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 47; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 110; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 35; Khudari, Usul, p. 42.]A consequence of this division is that if the quantified wajib  is not discharged within the given time-
limit, it constitutes a liability on the person ( dhimmah ) of the individual, as in the case of unpaid zakah
or an unpaid debt. Failure to discharge a wajib ghayr muhaddad , on the other hand, does not result in a
personal liability.
A question arises with regard to the value of the excessive portion in the supererogation of quantified
wajib . The question is whether an over-fulfillment of this type becomes a part of the wajib  itself. There
are two main views on this, one of which maintains that excessive performance in quantified wajib  also
becomes a part of the wajib . But the preferred view is that any addition to the minimal requirement
becomes mandub  only. For no punishment can be imposed for a failure to perform anything in addition
to the minimum required.[14. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 47. ]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 283It would be inaccurate to say that a means to a wajib  is also a wajib , or that a necessary ingredient of
wajib  is also wajib in every case. For such a view would tend to ignore the personal capacity of the
mukallaf  especially if the latter is unable to do what is required to be done: in the event, for example,
when the Friday congregational prayer cannot be held for lack of a large number of people in a locality.
It would be more accurate to say that when the means to wajib  consist of an act which is within the
capacity of the mukallaf  then that act is also wajib .[15. Ghazali, Mustasfa ,, I, 46; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 23.]The distinction between wajib  and mandub  is, broadly speaking, based on the idea that ignoring the
wajib  entails punishment (` iqab) while ignoring the mandub  does not. The distinction between  haram
and makruh  is based on a similar criterion: if doing something is punishable, it is haram , otherwise it is
makruh . This is generally correct, but one must add the proviso that punishment is not a necessary
requirement of a binding obligation, or wujub . In addition, as Imam Ghazali points out, the element of
punishment, whether in this world or in the hereafter, is not a certainty. Whereas in its positive sense
the wajib  is normally enforceable in this world and might also lead to a tangible advantage or reward,
the spiritual punishment for its neglect is, however, awaited and postponed to the hereafter. Hence the
invocation of punishment is not a necessary requirement of wajib . When God Almighty renders an act
obligatory upon people without mentioning a punishment for its omission, the act which is so demanded
is still wajib .[16. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 42. ]I.2 Mandub  (Recommended)Mandub  denotes a demand of the Lawgiver which asks the mukallaf  to do something which is,
however, not binding on the latter. To comply with the demand earns the mukallaf  spiritual reward
(thawab ) but no punishment is inflicted for failure to perform. Creating a charitable endowment ( waqf ),
for example, giving alms to the poor, fasting on days outside Ramadan, attending the sick, etc., are
duties of this kind. Mandub  is variously known as Sunnah , mustahabb  and nafl, which are all here
synonymous and covered by the same definition.[17. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 42; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 112; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence ,
p.197.] If it is an act which the Prophet has done at one time but omitted at other times, it is called Sunnah .
There are two types of Sunnah , namely Sunnah mu'akkadah (the emphatic Sunnah , also known as
Sunnah al-huda ), and Sunnah ghayr mu'akkadah , or supererogatory Sunnah . The call to congregational
prayers (i.e. the adhan ), attending congregational prayers, and gargling as a part of the ablution ( wudu' )
are examples of the former, whereas non-obligatory charity, and supererogatory prayers preceding the
obligatory salah  in early and late afternoon (i.e. zuhr, and 'asr) are examples of supererogatory Sunnah .
Performing the emphatic Sunnah  leads to spiritual reward from Almighty God while its neglect is
merely blameworthy but not punishable. However, if the entire population of a locality agree to
abandon the emphatic Sunnah , they are to be fought for contempt of the Sunnah . To perform the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 284supererogatory Sunnah , on the other hand, leads to spiritual reward while neglecting it is not
blameworthy. There is a third variety of Sunnah  known as Sunnah al-zawa id , which mainly refers to
the acts and conduct performed by the Prophet as a human being, such as his style of dress and choice
of food, etc., whose omission is neither abominable nor blameworthy.[18. Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p.71; Khudari, Usul , p.46.]Mandub  often occurs in the Qur'an in the form of a command which is then accompanied by indications
to suggest that the command is only intended to convey a recommendation. An example of this is the
Qur'anic command which requires that giving and taking of period loans must be set down in writing
(al-Baqarah, 2:282). But the subsequent portion of the same passage provides that `if any of you
deposits something with another, then let the trustee [faithfully] discharge his trust'. This passage
implies that if the creditor trusts the debtor, they may forego the requirement of documentation.
Another example of a command which only denotes a recommendation is the Qur'anic provision
regarding slaves, where the text provides, `and if any of your slaves seek their release from you in
writing, set them free [ fa-katibuhum ] if you know any good in them' (al-Nur, 24:3). The last portion of
this text indicates an element of choice which renders the command therein mandub . But in the absence
of such accompanying evidence in the text itself, the Qur'anic command is sometimes evaluated into
mandub  by reference to the general principles of the Shari'ah .
Sometimes the  mandub is conveyed in persuasive language rather than as a command per se . An
example of this is the Hadith which provides: `Whoever makes an ablution for the Friday prayers, it is
good, but if he takes a bath, it is better -[ afdal ].[19. Tabrizi, Mishkat , I, 168, Hadith no. 540.]A question arises in this connection as to whether the mandub  remains a mandub  once it has been
started, or becomes obligatory of continuation until it is completed. The Hanafis have held that once the
mandub  is commenced, it turns into an obligation and must be completed. For example, when a person
starts a supererogatory fast, according to this view, it is obligatory that he complete it, and failure to do
so renders him liable to the duty of belated performance ( qada' ). But according to the Shafi'is, whose
view here is generally preferred, the  mandub is never turned into wajib  and always remains as mandub ,
thereby leaving the person who has started it with the choice of discontinuing it whenever he wishes.
There is thus no duty of belated performance ( qada' ) on account of failure to complete a mandub .[20.
Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 48; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , pp. 72-74; Qasim, Usul , p. 322.]I.3 Haram (Forbidden)According to the majority of ulema, haram  (also known as mahzur ) is a binding demand of the lawgiver
in respect of abandoning something, which may be founded in a definitive or a speculative proof.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 285Committing the  haram is punishable and omitting it is rewarded. But according to the Hanafis, haram  is
a binding demand to abandon something which is established in definitive proof; if the demand is
founded in speculative evidence, it constitutes a makruh tahrimi , but not haram . The former resembles
the latter in that committing both is punished and omitting them is rewarded. But the two differ from
one another insofar as the willful denial of the haram  leads to infidelity, which is not the case with
regard to makruh tahrimi .[21. Qasim, Usul , p. 225; Aghnides,  Muhammedan Theories , p. 89; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 198.]The textual evidence for haram  occurs in a variety of forms, which may be summarised as follows:
Firstly, the text may dearly use the word  haram or any of its derivatives. For example, the Qur'anic text
which provides, 'forbidden to you [ hurrimat 'alaykum ] are the dead carcass, blood and pork' (al-
Ma'idah, 5:3); and `God permitted sale but prohibited [ harrama ] usury (al-Baqarah, 2:275). Similarly,
the Hadith which provides, 'everything belonging to a Muslim is forbidden [ haram ] to his fellow
Muslims: his blood, his property and his honour'.[22. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p. 473, Hadith no. 1775.]Secondly, haram  may be conveyed in other prohibitory terms which require the avoidance of a certain
form of conduct. For example, there is the Qur'anic text which provides, 'slay not [ la taqtulu ] the life
that God has made sacrosanct, save in the course of justice' (al-Ma'idah, 5:90); and 'devour not [ la ta'
kulu] one another's property in defiance of the law' (al-Baqarah, 2:188).
Thirdly, haram  may be communicated in the form of a command to avoid a certain form of conduct.
For example: there is the Qur'anic text which provides that wine-drinking and gambling are works of
the devil and then orders the believers to 'avoid it (al-Ma'idah, 5:90).
Fourthly, haram  may be communicated through expressions such as 'it is not permissible' or 'it is
unlawful' in a context which is indicative of total prohibition. For example, the Qur'anic text which
proclaims that `it is not permissible for you [ la yahillu lakum ] to inherit women against their will' (al-
Nisa', 4:19), or the Hadith which provides 'it is unlawful [ la yahillu ] for a Muslim to take the property
of another Muslim without his consent'.[23. Bayhaqi, al-Sunan al-Kubra , III, 10.]Fifthly, haram  is also identified by the enactment of a punishment for a certain form of conduct. There
are many instances of this in the Qur'an and Sunnah . The  hudud penalties are the most obvious
examples of this variety of haram . As is implied by its name, the hadd  penalty is specific in reference to
both the quantity of punishment and the type of conduct which it penalises. Alternatively, the text
which communicates tahrim  may only consist of an emphatic condemnation of a certain act without
specifying a penalty for it as such. Thus the Qur'an prohibits devouring the property of orphans by
denouncing it in the following terms: 'Those who eat up the property of orphans swallow fire into their
own bodies; they will soon be enduring a blazing fire' (al-Nisa', 4:10).

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 286Haram  is divided into two types: (a) haram li-dhatih or `that which is forbidden for its own sake', such
as theft, murder, adultery, marrying a close relative and performing salah  without an ablution, all of
which are forbidden for their inherent enormity; and (b) haram li-ghayrih , or 'that which is forbidden
because of something else'. An act may be originally lawful but has been made unlawful owing to the
presence of certain circumstances. For example: a marriage which is contracted for the sole purpose of
tahlil , that is, in order to legalise another intended marriage, performing salah  in stolen clothes, and
making an offer of betrothal to a woman who is already betrothed to another man. In each of these
examples, the act involved is originally lawful but has become haram  owing to the attending
circumstances. A consequence of this distinction between the two varieties of haram  is that haram li-
dhatih , such as marriage to one's sister or the sale of dead carcasses, is null and void ab initio (batil),
whereas violating a prohibition which is imposed owing to an extraneous factor is fasid  (irregular) but
not batil, and as such may fulfill its intended legal purpose. A marriage which is contracted for the
purpose of tahlil  is clearly forbidden, but it validly takes place nevertheless. Similarly, a contract of sale
which is concluded at the time of the Friday prayer is haram li-ghayrih and is forbidden. But according
to the majority of ulema the sale takes place nevertheless; with the exception of the Hanbalis and
Zahiris, who regard such a sale as batil. [24. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 113; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 34; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p. 70ff.]Another consequence of this distinction is that haram li-dhatih is not permissible save in cases of dire
necessity ( darurah ) of a kind which threatens the safety of the 'five principles' of life, religion, intellect,
lineage and property. In this way, uttering a word of infidelity, or drinking wine, is only permitted when
it saves life. Haram li-ghayrih , on the other hand, is permissible not only in cases of absolute necessity
but also when it prevents hardship. Thus a physician is permitted to look at the private parts of a patient
even in the case of illnesses which do not constitute an immediate threat to life.[25. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 35; Qasim,
Usul , p. 226 ff.]Another criterion for distinguishing the two varieties of haram  that some ulema have mentioned is that
haram li-ghayrih consists of an act which leads to haram li-dhatih . In this way, looking at the private
parts of another person is forbidden because it can lead to zina, which is haram  by itself. Similarly,
marrying two sisters simultaneously is haram  because it leads to the severance of ties of kinship
(qat`al-arham ), which is haram by itself.[26. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.34. ]I.4 Makruh  (Abominable)Makruh  is a demand of the Lawgiver which requires the mukallaf  to avoid something, but not in strictly
prohibitory terms. Makruh  is the opposite of mandub , which means that neglecting the mandub  amounts
to makruh . Since  makruh does not constitute a binding law, we merely say that omitting something

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 287which is makruh  is preferable to committing it. The perpetrator of something makruh  is not liable to
punishment, and according to the majority of ulema, he does not incur moral blame either. The Hanafis
are in agreement with the majority view in respect of only one of the two varieties of makruh , namely
makruh tanzihi , but not in regard to makruh  tahrimi . The latter, according to the Hanafis, entails moral
blame but no punishment. The ulema are all in agreement that anyone who avoids the makruh  merits
praise and gains closeness to God.[27. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 114; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.36. ]The textual authority for makruh  may consist of a reference to something which is specifically
identified as makruh , or may be so identified by words that may convey an equivalent meaning. There
is a Hadith, for example, in which the Prophet discouraged any prayers at midday until the decline of
the sun, with the exception of Friday. The actual word used in the Hadith is that the Prophet disliked
[kariha al-nabi ) prayers at that particular time.[28. Tabrizi, Mishkat , I, 330, Hadith no. 1047.]An equivalent term to makruh  occurs, for example, in the Hadith which reads: 'The most abominable of
permissible things [ abghad al-halal ] in the sight of God is divorce.' [29. Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 978, Hadith no. 3280; Abu 'Id,
Mubahith , p. 80. ]Makruh  may also be conveyed in the form of a prohibition but in language that indicates only
reprehensibility. An example of this is the Qur'anic text which provides, in an address directed to the
believers, 'Ask not about things which, if made clear to you, would trouble you, but if you ask about
them when the Qur'an is being revealed, then they will be explained to you' (al-Ma'idah, 5:101). An
example of this style of communication in the Hadith is as follows: 'Leave that of which you are
doubtful in favour of that which you do not doubt [. . .]' [30. Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 845, Hadith no. 2773.]Makruh  is the lowest degree of prohibition ( tahrim ), and in this sense is used as a convenient category
for matters which fall in the gray areas between halal  and haram , that is, matters which are definitely
discouraged but where the evidence to establish them as haram  is less than certain.[31. Qasim, Usul , p. 225.]As already noted, the Hanafis have divided makruh  into the two types of makruh  tanzihi  and makruh
tahrimi . The former is considered abominable for purposes of keeping pure such as avoiding raw onion
and garlic just before going to congregational prayers, or neglecting salat al-nafl , that is, supererogatory
prayers preceding, for example, the salat al-zuhr (early afternoon prayers). This kind of makruh  is
nearer to mubah  than to haram . Its commission is not punished but its omission is rewarded. The
Hanafi description of makruh  tanzihi  is the same as that which the majority of ulema have given to
makruh in general. The majority of ulema have characterised the value of makruh  to be that 'committing
it is not punishable but omitting it is praiseworthy'. Makruh tahrimi , or 'abominable to the degree of
prohibition' is, on the other hand, nearer to haram . An act is haram  when its prohibition is decreed in
definitive terms, otherwise it is makruh tahrimi . An example of makruh tahrimi is the wearing of gold
jewellry and silk garments for men, which are forbidden by an Ahad (solitary) Hadith. While referring

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 288to these two items, the Hadith provides: 'These are forbidden [ haram ] to the men of my community but
are lawful [ halal ] to their women.' [32. Abu Dawud, Sunan , III, 1133, Hadith no 4046.]Similarly, it is makruh tahrimi for a person to offer to buy something for which another person has
already made an offer. There is a Hadith which forbids this kind of purchase in the same way as it
forbids making an offer of engagement to a woman who is already betrothed to another man.[33. Abu Dawud,
Sunan , II, 556, Hadith no. 2075 ] Since both of the foregoing ahadith  are Ahad  whose authenticity is not devoid of
doubt, the prohibition therein is reduced from haram  to makruh tahrimi .
The difference between the Hanafis and the majority of ulema relates to the nature of the evidence on
which the makruh  is founded. When a prohibition is conveyed in an imperative demand of the
Lawgiver but there is some doubt over its authenticity or meaning, the majority of ulema classify it as
haram , whereas the Hanafis classify it as makruh tahrimi. The Hanafi position in regard to the division
of makruh  into these two types is essentially similar to their approach in regard to drawing a distinction
between fard and wajib .[34. Abu 'Id, Mabahith , pp, 80-82; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 116; Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 89.]I.5 Mubah  (Permissible)Mubah  (also referred to as halal  and ja'iz) is defined as communication from the Lawgiver concerning
the conduct of the  mukallaf which gives him the option to do or not to do something. The Lawgiver's
communication may be in the form of a clear  nass such as the Qur'anic text which provides, in a
reference to foodstuffs, that `this day all things good and pure have been made lawful ( uhilla ) to you
[...]' (al-Ma'idah, 5:6). Alternatively the text may state that the mukallaf will not incur a sin, blame or
liability if he wishes to act in a certain way. Concerning the permissibility of betrothal, for example, the
Qur'an provides, `there is no blame on you [ la junaha `alaykum ] if you make an offer of betrothal to a
woman [. . .]' (al-Baqarah, 2:235). Similarly, committing a sinful act out of sheer necessity is
permissible on the authority of the Qur'an, which provides, `If someone is compelled by necessity
without willful disobedience or transgression, then he is guiltless [ fala ithma `alayh ]' (al-Baqarah,
2:173).[35. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 42; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 115; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 198.]Sometimes a command to the Qur'an may only amount to permissibility when the nature of the conduct
in question or other relevant evidence indicates that such is the case. An example of this is the text
which orders worshippers to `scatter in the earth' once they have completed the Friday prayers (al-
Jumu`ah, 62:10). Although the believers have been ordered to `scatter in the earth', the nature of this
command and the type of activity to which it relates suggest that it conveys permissibility only.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 289In the event where the law provides no ruling to specify the value of a certain form of conduct, then
according to the doctrine of istishab al-asl (presumption of continuity), permissibility ( ibahah ) remains
the original state which is presumed to continue. The authority for this presumption is found in the
Qur'anic text which provides, in an address to mankind, that God Almighty `has created everything in
the earth for your benefit' (al-Baqarah, 2:29). By implication, it is understood that the benefit in
question cannot materialise unless `everything in the earth' is made mubah  for mankind to use and to
utilise in the first place.
Mubah  has been divided into three types. The first is mubah which does not entail any harm to the
individual whether he acts upon it or not, such as eating, hunting or walking in the fresh air. The second
type of mubah  is that whose commission does not harm the individual although it is essentially
forbidden. Included in this category are the prohibited acts which the Lawgiver has made permissible
on account of necessity, such as uttering words of unbelief raider duress, or eating the flesh of a dead
carcass to save one's life. The third variety of mubah  is not really mubah per se ; it is included under
mubah  for lack of a better alternative. This category of mubah  consists of things which were practiced
at one time but were then prohibited with the proviso that those who indulged in them before the
prohibition are exonerated. The Qur'an thus prohibits marriage with certain relatives, and the text then
continues to make an exception for such marriages that might have occurred in the past (al-Nisa', 4:22).
Similarly, wine-drinking was not prohibited until the Prophets migration to Madinah, and fell under the
category of mubah  until the revelation of the ayah  in sura al-Ma'idah (5:90) which imposed a total ban
on it.[36. Abu 'Id, Mabahith , pp. 84-88.]It would be incorrect, as al-Ghazali explains, to apply the term ' mubah ' to the acts of a child, an insane
person, or an animal, nor would it be correct to call the acts of God mubah . Acts and events which took
place prior to the advent of Islam are not to be called mubah  either. 'As far as we are concerned, our
position regarding them is one of abandonment [ tark]', which obviously means that such activities are
not to be evaluated at all. Mubah  proper, al-Ghazali adds, is established in the express permission of
Almighty God which renders the commission or omission of an act permissible either in religious terms
or in respect of a possible benefit or harm that may accrue from it in this world.[37. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 42. ]The ulema of usul definitely consider mubah  to be a hukm shar'i , although including it under al-hukm
al-taklifi is on the basis of mere probability as there is basically no liability [ taklif ] in mubah  as one of
the five varieties of defining law. The Hanafis have only differed with the majority with regard to the
sub-divisions of wajib  and makruh as already explained, but not with regard to mubah .
Bearing in mind the two sub-divisions of wajib  and makruh  that the Hanafis have added to al-hukm al-
taklifi , the Hanafis thus classify the latter into seven types, whereas the majority divide it into five
varieties only.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 290II. Declaratory Law ( al-Hukm al-Wad'i )'Declaratory law' is defined as communication from the Lawgiver which enacts something into a cause
(sabab ), a condition ( shart ) or a hindrance ( mani `) to something else. This may be illustrated by
reference to the Qur'anic text regarding the punishment of adultery, which enacts the act of adultery
itself as the cause of its punishment (al-Baqarah, 2:24). An example of the declaratory law which
consists of a condition is the Qur'anic' text on the pilgrimage of hajj: 'Pilgrimage is a duty owed to God
by people who can manage to make the journey' (Al-Imran 3:97). Both of the foregoing texts, in fact,
consist of a defining law and a declaratory law side by side. The defining law in the first text is the
ruling that the adulterer must be punished with a hundred lashes, and in the second text it is the duty of
the hajj pilgrimage itself. The declaratory law in the first text is the cause, which is the act of adultery -
the affect being the punishment, and in the second, it is the condition which must be present if the law
of the text is to be implemented. The second of the two texts thus enacts the ability of the individual to
make the journey into a condition for performing the pilgrimage. A more explicit example of a
declaratory law is the Hadith which provides that 'there is no nikah  without two witnesses'.[38. Abu Dawud,
Sunan , II, 557, Hadith no. 2079. ]The presence of two witnesses is thus rendered a condition for a valid marriage. And lastly, an example
of a declaratory law consisting of a hindrance is the Hadith which provides that 'there shall be no
bequest to an heir', [39. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 808; Hadith no. 2864.] which obviously enacts the tie of kinship between
the testator and the legatee into a hindrance to bequest. Similarly, the Hadith which lays down the rule
that 'the killer shall not inherit', renders killing a hindrance to inheritance. [40. Shafi`i, Risalah , p. 80; Ibn M ajah, Sunan ,
II, 913, Hadith no. 2735.]To execute the defining law is normally within the capacity of the mukallaf.  The demands, for example,
addressed to the mukallaf  concerning prayers and zakah  are both within his means. Declaratory law
may, on the other hand, be within or beyond the capacity of the mukallaf . For instance, the arrival of a
particular time of day which is the cause ( sabab ) of salah  is beyond the means and capacity of the
worshipper. [41. Khallaf,  'Ilm, p. 102; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p. 60. ]The function of declaratory law is explanatory in relation to defining law, in that the former explains the
component elements of the latter. Declaratory law thus informs us whether certain facts or event, are the
cause, condition or hindrance in relationship to defining law. It is, for example, by means of declaratory
law that we know offer and acceptance in a contract of sale to be the cause of the buyer's ownership,
that divorce causes the extinction of marital rights and obligations, and that the death of a person is the
cause of the right of the heir to his inheritance. Similarly, it is by means of a declaratory law that we

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 291know intellectual maturity to be the condition of voluntary disposition of property in gift ( hibah ) and
charitable endowment ( waqf ). [42. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence . pp. 61-62. ]The basic notion of dividing the rules of Shari'ah  into taklifi  and wad'i  is also applicable to modern
western law. When we read, in the Rent Act for example, a clause which requires the tenant to pay the
rent in accordance with the tenancy contract, it is a hukm  taklifi  which consists of a command.
Similarly, when there is a clause which requires the tenant not to use the premises for commercial
purposes, it is a demand consisting of a prohibition. And if there be a clause to the effect that the tenant
may sublet the property, it is an option which the tenant may or may not wish to exercise. Needless to
say, any aspect of such provisions may be subjected to certain conditions or hindrances as the
contracting parties may wish to stipulate. [43. Cf. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 104.]As noted above, declaratory law is divided into five varieties. The first three of these, namely cause,
condition and hindrance, have already been discussed to some extent. Two other varieties which are
added to these are the ` azimah  (strict law) as opposed to rukhsah  (concessionary law), and valid ( sahih )
as opposed to invalid ( batil). To include the first three under al-hukm al-wad'i is obvious from the very
definition of the latter. But classifying the last two divisions, that is, azimah-rukhsah and sahih-batil ,
under al-hukm al-wad'i may need a brief explanation. It is well to point out in this connection that
almost every concession that the Lawgiver has granted to the individual is based on certain causes
which must be present if the concession is to be utilised. The Lawgiver, for example, enacts traveling,
illness or removal of hardship into the cause of a concession in regard to, say, fasting or salah . In
classifying sahih  and batil as sub-divisions of declaratory law, it will be further noted that a hukm  is
valid when the conditions of its validity are fulfilled, and is invalid if these conditions are not met. In
short, since the last two divisions are basically concerned with causes and conditions, they are included
under the class of declaratory law. [44. Qasim, Usul , p. 228; Abu `Id, Mabahith , p. 105.]We shall now proceed to discuss each of the five varieties of al-hukm al-wad'i separately.II.1 Cause ( Sabab )A sabab  is defined as an attribute which is evident and constant [ wasf zahir wa-mundabat ] and which
the Lawgiver has identified as the indicator of a hukm  in such a way that its presence necessitates the
presence of the hukm  and its absence means that the hukm  is also absent. A sabab  may be an act which
is within the power of the mukallaf , such as murder and theft in their status as the causes of retaliation
(qisas ) and a hadd  penalty respectively. Alternatively, the sabab  may be beyond the control of the
mukallaf such as minority being the cause of guardianship over the person and property of a minor.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 292When the sabab  is present, whether it is within or beyond the control of the mukallaf , its effect (i.e. the
musabbab ) is automatically present even if the  mukallaf had not intended it to be. For example, when a
man divorces his wife by a revocable  talaq , he is entitled to resume marital relations with her even it he
openly denies himself that right. Similarly, when a man enters into a contract of marriage, he is
obligated to provide dower and maintenance for his wife even if he explicitly stipulates the opposite in
their contract. For once the Lawgiver identifies something as a cause, the effect of that cause comes
about by virtue of the Lawgiver's decree regardless of whether the mukallaf  intended it to be so or
not.[45. Shawkani, Irshad , p.6; Khallaf, ` Ilm; p. 118; Abu `Id, Mabahith , p. 92.]II.2 Condition ( Shart )A shart  is defined as an evident and constant attribute whose absence necessitates the absence of the
hukm  but whose presence does not automatically bring about its object ( mashrut ). For example, the
presence of a valid marriage is a precondition of divorce, her it does not mean that when there is a valid
marriage, it must lead to divorce. Similarly, the ablution ( wudu' ) is a necessary condition of salah , but
the presence of wudu  does not necessitate salah .
A condition normally complements the cause and gives it its full effect. Killing is, for example, the
cause of retaliation; however, this is on condition that it is deliberate and hostile. The contract of
marriage legalises/causes sexual enjoyment between the spouses; however, this is on condition that two
witnesses testify to the marriage. The legal consequences of a contract are not fully realised without the
fulfillment of its necessary conditions.
A condition may be laid down by the Lawgiver, or by the mukallaf . Whenever the former enacts a
condition, it is referred to as shart shar'i , or 'legal condition', but if it is a condition which is stipulated
by the mukallaf , it is referred to shart ja'li , or 'improvised condition'. An example of the former is
witnesses in a marriage contract, and of the latter, the case when spouses stipulate in their marriage
contract the condition that they will reside in a particular locality.
Shart also differs with rukn (pillar, essential requirement) in that the latter partakes in the essence of a
thing. This would mean that the law or hukm , could not exist in the absence of its rukn. When the whole
or even a part of the rukn is absent, the hukm  collapses completely, with the result that the latter
becomes null and void ( batil). A shart , on the other hand, does not partake in the essence of a hukm ,
although it is a complementary part of it. Bowing and prostration ( ruku' and sajdah ), for example, are
each an essential requirement ( rukn) of salah  and partake in the very essence of salah , but ablution is a

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 293condition of salah  as it is an attribute whose absence disrupts the salah  but which does not partake in its
essence.[46. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 118; Abu `Id, Mabahith , pp. 96-99; Qasim, Usul , p. 231.]II.3 Hindrance ( Mani `)A mani` is defined as an act or an attribute whose presence either nullifies the hukm  or the cause of the
hukm . In either case, the result is the same, namely that the presence of the mani' means the absence of
the hukm . For example, difference of religion, and killing, are both obstacles to inheritance between a
legal heir and his deceased relative, despite the fact that there may exist a valid tie of kinship ( qarabah )
between them: when the obstacle is present, the hukm , which is inheritance, is absent.
From the viewpoint of its effect on the cause ( sabab ) or on the hukm  itself, the mani' is divided into two
types. First, the mani ` which affects the cause in the sense that its presence nullifies the cause. An
example of this is the indebtedness of a person who is liable to the payment of zakah . The fact of his
being ill debt hinders the cause of zakah , which is ownership of property. A person who is in debt to the
extent of insolvency is no longer considered, for purposes of zakah , to be owning any property at all.
Thus when the cause is nullified, the hukm  itself, which is the duty to pay zakah , is also nullified.
Secondly, there is the hindrance which affects the  hukm . The presence of this type of hindrance nullifies
the hukm  directly, even if the cause and the condition are both present. An example of this is paternity,
which hinders retaliation: if a father kills his son, he is not liable to retaliation although he may be
punished otherwise. Paternity thus hinders retaliation according to the majority of ulema (except Imam
Malik) despite the presence of the cause of retaliation, which is killing, and its condition, which is
hostility and the intention to kill. Imam Malik has held, on the other hand, that the father may be
retaliated against for the deliberate killing of his offspring.[47. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 120; Abu `Id, Mabahith , p. 101.]II.4 Strict Law (` Azimah ) and Concessionary Law ( Rukhsah )A law, or hukm , is an 'azimah when it is in its primary and unabated rigour without reference to any
attenuating circumstances which may soften its original force or even entirely suspend it. It is, in other
words, a law as the Lawgiver had intended it in the first place. For example, salah , zakah , the hajj,
jihad , etc., which God has enjoined upon all competent individuals, are classified under 'azimah . A law,
or hukm , is a rukhsah , by contrast, when it is considered in conjunction with attenuating circumstances.
Whereas ` azimah  is the law in its normal state, rukhsah  embodies the exceptions, if any, that the

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 294Lawgiver has granted with a view to bringing facility and ease in difficult circumstances. Thus the law
which grants a concession to travelers to break the fast during Ramadan is an exception to the norm that
requires everyone to fast. The concessionary law in this case is valid only for the duration of traveling,
after which the 'azimah must be complied with again. Similarly, if a Muslim is compelled to renounce
his faith, he is permitted to do so even though the strict law would require him to persist in his faith
until death. The excuse in this case is founded in the right of the person to life, and is clearly granted in
the Qur'an (al-Nahl, 16:106), which allows the utterance of words of infidelity under duress. Strict law
may consist of either commands or prohibitions. Thus the prohibition of murder, theft, adultery, wine-
drinking, etc., are all instances of 'azimah in the Qur'an.[48. Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 85ff; Abu `Id, Mabahith , p. 104.]`Azimah  is a command of the Lawgiver which binds the mukallaf , while rukhsah  embodies a concession
in respect of that command. The two are interrelated in that rukhsah  can only exist when there is
`azimah  in the first place. God Almighty has not made, for example, fasting in the month of Shawwal
(the month following Ramadan) obligatory upon Muslims. This is not a concession, as there exists no
obligations in the first place. Similarly, the normal state of ibahah  regarding foods and drinks is not
rukhsah , whereas the permission to eat prohibited meat in certain circumstances is  rukhsah . It would
also be incorrect to call the permissibility of tayammum  (i.e. dry ablution with clean earth or sand) in
the absence of water a rukhsah : when there is no water it is not possible to make an ablution proper
wudu' in the first place. But tayammum  is a rukhsah  if it is a substitute for wudu' when the weather is
extremely cold. The point is that in rukhsah  the individual must be able to take an alternative course of
action.[49. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 62-63.]Rukhsah  occurs to any of four varieties. Firstly, in the form of permitting a prohibited act on grounds of
necessity, such as eating the flesh of a carcass, and drinking wine at the point of starvation or extreme
thirst. Secondly, rukhsah  may occur in the form of omitting a wajib  when conformity to that wajib
causes hardship, such as the concession granted to the traveler to shorten the quadruple salah , or not to
observe the fasting of Ramadan. Thirdly, in the area of transactions, rukhsah  occurs in the form of
validating contracts which would normally be disallowed. For example, lease and hire ( ijarah ), advance
sale ( salam ) and order for the manufacture of goods ( istisna `) are all anomalous, as the object of
contract therein is non-existent at the time of contract, but they have been exceptionally permitted in
order to accommodate the public need for such transactions. And lastly,  rukhsah occurs in the form of
concessions to the Muslim ummah  from certain rigorous laws which were imposed under previous
revelations. For example, zakah  to the  extent of one-quarter of one's property, the impermissibility of
salah  outside a mosque, and the illegality of taking booty (i.e. ghanimah ), which were imposed on
people under previous religions, have been removed by the Shari'ah  of Islam. [50. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 50; Abu `Id,
Mabahith , pp. 106-112. ]II.5 Valid, Irregular and Void ( Sahih, Fasid, Batil )

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 295These are Shari'ah  values which describe and evaluate legal acts incurred by the mukallaf.  To evaluate
an act according to these criteria depends on whether or not the act in question fulfils the essential
requirements ( arkan ) and conditions ( shurut ) that the Shari'ah  has laid down for it, as well as to ensure
that there exist no obstacles to hinder its proper conclusion. For example, salah  is a shar'i  act and is
evaluated as valid when it fulfils all the essential requirements and conditions that the Shari'ah  has
provided in this regard. Conversely, salah becomes void when any of its essential requirements and
conditions are lacking. Similarly, a contract is described as valid when it fulfils all of its necessary
requirements, and where there is nothing to hinder its conclusion; otherwise it is void. When salah  is
performed according to its requirements, it fulfils the wajib , otherwise, the wajib  remains unfulfilled. A
valid contract gives rise to all of its legal consequences whereas a void contract fails to satisfy its legal
purpose.
The ulema are in agreement to the effect that acts of devotion (` ibadat ) can either be valid or void, in
the sense that there is no intermediate category in between. Legal acts are valid when they fulfill all the
requirements pertaining to the essential requirements ( arkan ), causes, conditions and hindrances, and
are void when any of these is lacking or deficient. An act of devotion which is void is nom-existent ab
initio and of no consequence whatsoever. The majority of ulema have maintained a similar view with
regard to transactions, namely, that a transaction is valid when it is complete in all respects. Only a
valid contract of sale, for example, can give rise to its legal consequences, namely, to transfer
ownership of the object of sale to the buyer and to establish the vendor's ownership over its price
(thaman ). A contract is void when it is deficient in respect of any of its requirements, although the
Hanafis are in disagreement with the majority over the precise nature of this deficiency. The majority of
ulema maintain that invalidity is a monolithic concept in that there are no shades and degrees of
invalidity. An act or transaction is either valid or void, and there is nothing in between. According to
this view, fasid and batil are two words with the same meaning, whether in reference to devotional
matters or to civil transactions. Likewise, to the majority it makes no difference whether the deficiency
in a contract affects an essential element ( rukn) such as the sale of a dead carcass, or a condition, such
as sale for an unspecified price; both are void and non-existent ab initio .
The Hanafis have, however, distinguished an intermediate category between the valid and void, namely
the fasid . When the deficiency in a contract affects an essential requirement ( rukn), the contract is null
and void and fulfils no legal propose. If, however, the deficiency in a contract only affects a condition,
the contract is fasid  but not void. A fasid  contract, although deficient in some respects, is still a contract
and produces some of its legal consequences, but not all. Thus a fasid  contract of sale establishes the
purchaser's ownership over the object of sale when he has taken possession thereof, but does not entitle
the purchaser to the usufruct ( intifa' ). Similarly, in the case of an irregular contract of marriage, such as
one without witnesses, the spouses or the qadi must either remove the deficiency or dissolve the
marriage, even if the marriage has been consummated. If the deficiency is known before

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 296consummation, the consummation is unlawful. But the wife is still entitled to the dower ( mahr ) and
must observe the waiting period of ` iddah  upon dissolution of marriage. The offspring of a fasid
marriage is legitimate, but the wife is not entitled to maintenance, and no right of inheritance between
the spouses can proceed from such a marriage.
The Hanafis describe the fasid  as something which is essentially lawful ( mashru `) but is deficient in
respect of an attribute ( wasf) as opposed to the batil which is unlawful ( ghayr mashru' ) on account of its
deficiency in regard to both essence ( asl) and attribute The Hanafi approach to the fasid  is also
grounded in the idea that the deficiency which affects the attribute but not the essence of a transaction
can often be removed and rectified. If, for example, a contract of sale is concluded without assigning a
specified price, it is possible to specify the price ( thaman ) after the conclusion of the contract and thus
rectify the irregularity at a later opportunity, that is, as soon as it is known to exist or as soon as
possible.[51. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 51-52; Abu `Id, Mabahith . pp. 103-104; Qasim, Usul, pp. 236-238.]III. The Pillars ( Arkan ) of Hukm Shar'iThe hukm shar'i , that is, the law or value of Shari'ah , consists of three essential components. First of all,
the hukm  must have been authorised by the hakim , that is, the Lawgiver; it must also have a subject
matter which is referred to as mahkum fih , and then an audience, namely the mahkum `alayh , who must
be capable of understanding or at least of receiving the  hukm . We shall treat each of these under a
separate heading, as follows.III.1 The Lawgiver ( Hakim )The ulema are unanimous to the effect that the source of all law in Islam is God Most High, whose will
and command is known to the mukallaf either directly through divine revelation, or indirectly by means
of inference, deduction and ijtihad . The Qur'an repeatedly tells us that 'The prerogative of command
belongs to God alone' (Al-Imran, 6:57). Law and justice in the Muslim community must derive their
validity and substance from the principles and values that the Lawgiver has sanctioned. This is the
purport of the Qur'anic text in sura al-Ma'idah (5:45 and 5:49) which declares to be unbelievers those
who refuse to accept the authority of the divine law. Even the Prophet does not partake in the
prerogative of command, as his command, or that of the ruler, the imam, the master or the father for
that matter, does not constitute binding authority in its own right; instead, obedience to such individuals

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 297is founded in the command of the Lawgiver. Neither is human intellect, or 'aql, alone, a source of law
in its own right.[52. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 53; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 54.]The ulema are in disagreement, however, as to the way in which the will or the hukm  of the Lawgiver
regarding the conduct of the mukallaf is to be known and identified. Can we know it by means of our
intellectual faculty without the aid and mediation of messengers and scriptures, or is the human intellect
incapable of ascertaining the law without divine guidance? A similar question arises concerning
harmony and concordance between reason and revelation, in that when the human intellect determines
that something is good ( hasan ) or evil ( qabih ), is it imperative that the hukm  of the Lawgiver should be
identical with the dictates of reason? In response to these questions, the ulema have advanced three
different views, which are as follows:
Firstly, the Ash'arites, namely the followers of Abu'l-Hasan al-Ash'ari (d. 324 A.H.), maintain that it is
not possible for human intellect to determine what is good and evil in the conduct of the mukallaf , or to
identify the hukm  of the Lawgiver concerning the conduct of the mukallaf , without the aid of divine
guidance. For human reasoning and judgment are liable to err. While an act may be evaluated by one
person as good, another person might say the opposite. We normally say, for example, that honesty is
good, but when it is likely to cause the death of an innocent person in the hands of a tyrant, it may be
regarded as evil. It is therefore not for the human intellect to determine the values of things, and we
cannot say that what the 'aql deems to be good is necessarily good in the sight of God, or that what it
considers evil is also evil in His sight. The Ash'arites thus maintain that right and wrong are not
determined by reference to the nature of things, or our perception thereof, but are determined as such by
God. When the lawgiver permits or demands an act, we know that it is right/good, and when He forbids
an act, it is certain that the act in question is wrong/evil. Hence the criterion of right and wrong is shar' ,
not 'aql. According to this view, which is held by the majority of ulema, what the law commands is
good and what it forbids is evil. This view is in accord with what is known as the principle of the rule of
law (also known as the principle of legality) which establishes that a man is not required to do
something or to avoid doing it unless the law has been communicated to him in advance. No-one is
either rewarded for an act or punished for an omission unless he knows its status by means of a clear
communication. Thus when a person happens to be living in total isolation and has never received the
message of the Lawgiver, he is not a mukallaf  and deserves neither reward nor punishment. This view
quotes in support the Qur'anic proclamation: `And We never punish until We send a messenger' (al-Isra,
17:15), which indicates that reward and punishment are based on the revealed law, not the human
intellect. Elsewhere in the Qur'an, we also read, in a reference to the purpose of divine revelation, `[...]
so that after the coming of messengers, mankind would have no plea against God' (al-Nisa, 4:165). In
yet another place the Qur'an affirms that punishment is imposed only after the people are duly warned
but not before: in a reference to the disbelievers, the Qur'an thus proclaims: 'Had We inflicted on them a
penalty before this [revelation] they would have said: Our Lord! If only you had sent us a messenger,
we would have followed your signs [. . .]' (Ta-Ha, 20:134).

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 298The Ash'arites maintain the view that the commands of the Lawgiver relate to the conduct of the
mukallaf  only after the advent of Islam and that prior to this event there is no basis for obligation.
Infidelity ( kufr) is not haram , nor is faith ( lyman ) wajib  before the revelation actually declares it so.[53.
Shawkani,  Irshad , p.7. Abu Zahrah,  Usul , p.57ff; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 97.]Secondly, the Mu'tazilah, that is, the followers of Ibrahim al-Nazzam, have held the view that human
intellect can identify the law of God regarding the conduct of the mukallaf  even without the mediation
of scriptures and messengers. The shar' only removes the curtain from what the ` aql could itself
perceive, and in essence the former is identical with the latter. The intellect (` aql) can identify the good
and evil in human conduct by reference to its benefit and harm. God's law concerning the conduct of the
mukallaf  is not only identifiable by the human intellect but is also identical with the dictates of the
human intellect. God only asks the  mukallaf to do what is beneficial and forbids him from doing what is
harmful. Whatever the ` aql sees as good or right, is also good in the sight of God, and vice versa. A
person who acts against the requirement of reason may therefore be punished and one who acts in
harmony with it may be rewarded. In this way, a person who has received no communication from the
Lawgiver can still be considered a mukallaf  and be held responsible on the basis of reason, and his
punishment or reward can be determined accordingly. The Mu'tazilah assert that it is impossible for
God to command something which is inherently evil or to prohibit something that is intrinsically good,
which obviously means that shar` and ` aql are always in agreement with one another.[54. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 36;
Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.98; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p.121.]Al-Ghazali is critical of the Mu'tazili view for its propensity to turn the determination of good and evil
into a totally relative proposition. When an act is agreeable to one person and disagreeable to another, it
is good from the viewpoint of the former and evil from that of the latter. Such a relativistic and
circumstantial approach to good and evil is totally unacceptable. The Shari'ah  does not and cannot
operate on this basis. Instead, the Shari'ah evaluates the acts and conduct of the mukallaf  on an
objective plane regardless of whether they agree or disagree with particular interests. When the
Lawgiver commands an act, or when He praises it, it is praiseworthy and good in all cases.[55. Ghazali,
Mustasfa , I, 136.] Al-Shawkani is also critical of the Mu'tazili view, and highlights some of its weaknesses by
saying that certain areas of human conduct are not amenable to rational evaluation. It is true that 'aql
can determine the value, say, of truth and falsehood, as truth is beneficial and lying is harmful. 'Aql can
also discern the value of saving the life of a drowning or of a starving man, yet it cannot determine the
virtue of fasting on the last day of Ramadan or the enormity of fasting on the day which follows it. The
good and evil in this case can only be determined by shar`, not by 'aql.[56. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 7.] Most of the
`ibadat , including salah  and the pilgrimage of hajj, fall under this category. The human intellect may be
able to perceive a value in them only because of a benevolence and grace ( lutf) therein which prevents
obscenity and corruption; but ` aql alone is unable to assess the precise value of ` ibadat .[57. Ghazali, Mustasfa , I,
36.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 299The Mu'tazili approach to the question of right and wrong embodies a utilitarian approach to
jurisprudence in the sense that a good law is that which brings the greatest benefit to the largest number.
Right and wrong are evaluated from the viewpoint of the benefit and harm that they entail to the person
who acts upon it and to others. Acts which do not relate to this context are simply regarded as of no
consequence; they are branded as ` abath , that is, totally `in vain'.
Thirdly, the Maturidis, namely the followers of Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (d.333 A.H.) have suggested a
middle course, which is adopted by the Hanafis and considered to be the most acceptable. According to
this view, right and wrong in the conduct of the mukallaf can indeed be ascertained and evaluated by
the human intellect. But this does not necessarily mean that the law of God in regard to such conduct is
always identical with the dictates of 'aql, for human intellect is liable to error. The knowledge of right
and wrong must therefore be based on divine communication. This view basically combines the two
foregoing opinions, but tends to lean more toward the Ash'arites in that the responsibility of the
mukallaf  is to be determined not with reference to the dictates of human reason but on the basis of the
law as the Lawgiver has communicated it. ` Aql is capable of discerning good and evil, but this
evaluation does not constitute the basis of reward and punishment; which is a matter which is solely
determined by the Lawgiver. Whatever the Lawgiver has commanded is right, and merits reward, and
whatever He has forbidden is wrong and its perpetrator is liable to punishment. This view also agrees
with that of the Mu'tazilah to the extent of its recognition that the inherent values of things are
discernible by human intellect which can perceive and detect values in the nature of things. The
Maturidis, however, differ with the Mu'tazilah in that they hold that no reward or punishment can be
granted on the basis of ` aql alone.[58. Abu Zahrah Usul , p. 56; Khallaf,  'Ilm, p. 99; Abu `Id, Mabahith , p. 123; Qasim, Usul, pp.239-243.]III.2 The Subject-Matter of Hukm  (al-Mahkum Fih )Mahkum fih denotes the acts, rights and obligations of the mukallaf which constitute the subject-matter
of a command, prohibition or permissibility. When the ruling of the Lawgiver occurs in the forms of
either  wajib or mandub , in either case the individual is required to act in some way. Similarly, when the
hukm  of the Lawgiver consists of a prohibition ( tahrim ) or abomination ( karahah ), it is once again
concerned with the conduct of the mukallaf . In sum, all commands and prohibitions are concerned with
the acts and conduct of the mukallaf .
When the demand of the Lawgiver occurs in the form of a defining law ( al-hukm al-taklifi ) such as
fasting, jihad , and the payment of zakah , etc., the subject-matter of the hukm  is the act of the  mukallaf .
Similarly, when the demand of the Lawgiver occurs in the form of declaratory law ( al-hukm al-wad`i ),

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 300such as ablution ( wudu' ) being a condition of salah , or sale which is the cause ( sabab ) of ownership, or
killing which is a hindrance ( mani `) to inheritance, the subject-matter of hukm  in all these consists of
the act of the mukallaf . Occasionally, the mahkum fih does not consist of the conduct of the individual,
but even then it is related to it. For example, the arrival of Ramadan which is the cause ( sabab ) of
fasting is not an act of the individual, but is related to the latter in the sense that the effect ( musabbab )
of that cause, namely the fasting, consists of the act of the mukallaf.[59. Khallaf, `Ilm, p. 128; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 249.]In order to constitute the subject matter of a hukm , the conduct which the individual is required to do, or
avoid doing, must fulfill the following three conditions.
Firstly, the individual must know the nature of the conduct so that he can perform what is required of
him or refrain from that which is forbidden.[60. Knowledge in this context means understanding the nature of a command or a prohibition
by the individual to the extent that he can act upon it. It does not mean affirmation of the mind ( tasdiq ). For if this were to be a requirement, the unbelievers would
have been excluded from the meaning of mukallaf , which they are not. See Shawkani, Irshad , p. 11.] An ambivalent text or a locution which
does not impart this knowledge cannot constitute the basis of either a command or a prohibition. The
ambivalent ( mujmal ) text of the Qur'an concerning salah , zakah  and hajj, for example, did not obligate
anyone until these matters were explained and clarified by the Prophet. The manner in which these
obligations were to be discharged was also explained in precise terms. Furthermore, the ulema are in
agreement to the effect that the necessary instruction or explanations must not be delayed and must be
given in time when they are needed, otherwise they would fail to provide the basis of obligation ( taklif ).
When we say that the individual must know the nature of the act he is required to do, it means that it
should be possible for him to obtain such knowledge. Hence when a person is in full possession of his
capacities and it is possible for him to learn the law, he is presumed to know his legal obligations. The
law is therefore applied to him, and his ignorance of the rules of Shari'ah  is no excuse. For if actual
knowledge by the individual were to be a requirement of the law, it would be very difficult to prove
such knowledge in all cases of violation. It is therefore sufficient to ensure that the individual can
acquire knowledge of the Shari'ah  either directly or by asking those who have such knowledge.
Secondly, the act which the individual is required to do must be within his capability, or, in the case of
a prohibition, be within his capability to avoid. No law may thus demand something which is beyond
the capacity of the individual. The principle here is dearly stated in the Qur'an, which declares that `God
does not obligate a living soul beyond the limits of his capacity' (al-Baqarah, 2:256) and that `God puts
no burden on any person beyond what He has given him' (al-Talaq, 65:7).
An act may be conceptually unfeasible, such as asking a person to be awake and asleep at the same
time, or asking him to do and not to do something simultaneously. Likewise, an act may be physically
impossible, such as ordering a person to fly without the necessary means. No-one may be required to do
the impossible, and it makes no difference whether the act is impossible by its nature or whether it is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 301beyond the capacity of the individual in view of his particular conditions.[61. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 11; Khallaf, ` Ilm, p.
128ff; Abu Zahrah, Usul , 250ff.]A corollary of this rule is that no person may be obligated to act on behalf of another person or to stop
another competent individual from acting. For this would be tantamount to asking a person to do the
impossible. No-one may therefore be legally obligated to pay the zakah  on behalf of his brother, or to
perform the salah  on behalf of his father, or to prevent his neighbour from committing theft. All that
one mukallaf  may be lawfully expected to do in such situations is to give good advice ( nasihah ) as a
part of his general duty to promote good and to prevent evil to the extent that this is possible for him as
a law-abiding citizen.
Similarly, no-one may be obligated to do or not to do something in regard to which he has no choice,
such as asking someone to act against his natural and biological functions. Thus when we read in the
Hadith a command asking the Muslims to `avoid anger [ la taghdab ]', although the manifest ( zahir )
terms of this Hadith demand avoidance of a natural phenomenon, what it really means is that the
adverse consequences of uncontrolled anger which might lead to taking the law into one's own hands
must be avoided. To give another example, the Qur'an orders the believers 'not to despair over matters
that have passed you by, nor to exult over the favours that are bestowed upon you' (al-Hadid, 57:23).
Pleasure and despair are natural phenomena, and as such they are basically beyond the individual's
control. What is really meant here is that one should avoid the consequences of despair such as violence
against oneself or another person, and ensure that joy and happiness do not lead to arrogance and
contemptuous behaviour.
There is, of course, some hardship involved in all obligations. The kind of hardship that people can
tolerate without prejudice or injury is not the aim. It is intolerable hardship which the Shari'ah  does not
impose. The Shari'ah , for instance, forbids continuous fasting ( sawm al-wisal ), or staying up all night
for worship. Furthermore, the Shari'ah  has granted certain concessions with a view to preventing
hardship to individuals, and it is strongly recommended that they be utilised. This is the purport of the
reminder contained in the Hadith that 'God loves to see that His concessions are taken advantage of, just
as He hates to see the commission of a sin.' [62. Ibn Hanbal, Musnad , II, 108. ]In yet another Hadith we read an address to the believers, who are asked: `fulfill your duties to the
extent of your ability', [63. Muslim, Sahih Muslim , p.104,. Hadith no.378.] which obviously means that legal obligations
are only operative within the limits of one's capacity.
A hukm shar`i may sometimes impose unusual hardship on the individual, such as the fulfillment of
certain collective obligations like jihad  (holy struggle) and hisbah , that is, promotion of good and
prevention of evil, under adverse conditions. Jihad  which requires the sacrifice of one's life is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 302undoubtedly onerous in the extreme. But it is deemed necessary and warranted in view of the values
that are upheld and defended thereby.[64. Cf. Abu `Id, Mabahith , p.139.]And lastly, the demand to act or not to act must originate in an authoritative source which can command
the obedience of the mukallaf . This would mean that the hukm  must emanate from God or His
messenger. It is mainly due to this requirement that the proof or evidence in which the law is founded
must be identified and explained. Consequently, we find that in their juristic expositions, the fuqaha
normally explain the evidential basis ( hujjiyyah ) of the rules of Shari'ah  that they expound, especially
rules which are aimed at regulating the conduct of the mukallaf . [65. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 202; Abu Zahrah, Usul ,
p.256ff.]The next topic which needs to be discussed under the subject-matter of hukm  is the division of rights
into the two categories of haqq Allah and haqq al-`abd .
The acts of the mukallaf  may consist of either a Right of God ( haqq Allah ) or a Right of Man ( haqq al-
`abd), or of a combination of both. The Right of God is called so not because it is of any benefit to God,
but because it is beneficial to the community at large and not merely to a particular individual. It is, in
other words, a public right and differs from the Right of Man, or private right, in that its enforcement is
a duty of the state. The enforcement of a private right, on the other hand, is up to the person whose right
has been infringed, who may or may nor wish to demand its enforcement.[66. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 128; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p.
128.] The ulema have further classified these rights under four main categories, which are as follows.
Firstly, acts which exclusively consist of the Right of God, such as acts of devotion and worship,
including salah  and jihad , which are the pillars of religion and are necessary for the establishment of an
Islamic order. These, which are often referred to as huquq Allah al-khalisah , or pure Rights of God',
occur in eight varieties:
a) Rights of God which, consist exclusively of worship, such, as professing the faith ( iman ), salah ,
zakah , the pilgrimage and jihad .
b) Rights which consist of both worship and financial liability ( ma'unah ), such as charity given on the
occasion of 'id al-fitr , marking the end of Ramadan.
c) Rights in which financial liability is greater than worship, like the tithe that is levied on agricultural
crops.
d) Rights of God which consist of financial liability but have a propensity toward punishment, such as
the imposition of kharaj tax on land in the conquered territories.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 303e) Rights which consist of punishment only, like the hudud , that is, the prescribed penalties for theft and
adultery, and so forth.
f) Rights which consist of minor punishment (` uqubah qasirah ), such as excluding the murderer from
the inheritance of his victim. This is called ` uqubah qasirah on account of the fact that it inflicts only a
financial loss.
g) `Punishments which lean toward worship', such as the penances ( kaffarat ).
h) Exclusive rights, in the sense that they consist of rights alone and are not necessarily addressed to the
mukallaf , such as the community right to mineral wealth or to the spoils of war ( ghana'im ).[67. Abu Sinnah,
Nazariyyah al-Haqq' , p.179; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p. 141ff.]Secondly, acts which exclusively consist of the rights of men, such as the right to enforce a contract, or
the right to compensation for loss, the purchaser's right to own the object he has purchased, the vendor's
right to own the price paid to him, the right of pre-emption ( shuf ), and so on. To enforce such rights is
entirely at the option of the individual concerned; he may demand them or waive them, even without
any consideration.
Thirdly, acts in which the rights of the community and those of individuals, are combined, while of the
two the former preponderate. The right to punish a slanderer ( qadhif ) belongs, according to the Hanafis,
to this class, by reason of the attack made on the honour of one of its members. Since the Right of God
is dominant in qadhf , the victim of this offence (i.e. the maqdhuf ) cannot exonerate the offender from
punishment. The Shafi`is have, however, held the contrary view by saying that qadhf  is an exclusive
Right of Man and that the person so defamed is entitled to exonerate the defamer. All acts which aim at
protecting human life, intellect and property, fall under this category. To implement consultation
(shura ) in public affairs is one example, or the right of the individual in respect of bay'ah  in electing the
head of state. According to the Maliki jurist al-Qarafi, all rights in Islam partake in the Right of God in
the exclusive sense that there is no right whatsoever without the haqq Allah constituting a part thereof.
Thus when a person buys a house, he exercises his private right insofar as it benefits him, but the
transaction partakes in the Right of God insofar as the buyer is liable to pay the purchase price. The
basic criterion of distinction between the Right of God and the Right of Man is whether it can be
exempted by the individual or not. Thus the vendor is able to exonerate the purchaser from paying the
price, and a wife is able to exonerate her husband from paying her a dower ( mahr ), but the individual
cannot exonerate anyone from obligatory prayers, or from the payment of zakah .[68. Abu Sinnah, Nazariyyah al-
Haqq',  p. 181.]Fourthly, there are matters in which public and private rights are combined but where the latter
preponderate. Retaliation ( qisas ), and blood-money ( diyah ) of any kind, whether for life or for grievous

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 304injury, fall under this category of rights. The community is entitled to punish such violations, but the
right of the heirs in retaliation and in diyah  for erroneous killing, and the right of the victim in respect
of diyah  for injuries, is preponderant in view of the grievance and loss that they suffer as a result. The
guardian ( wali) of the deceased, in the case of qisas , is entitled to pardon the offender or to accept a
compensation from him. But the state, which represents the community, is still entitled to punish the
offender through a ta'zir punishment even if he is pardoned by the relatives of the deceased.[69. Abu Zahrah,
Usul , p. 257; Abu 'Id, Mabahith , p. 145.]III.3 Legal Capacity ( Ahliyyah )Being the last of the three pillars ( arkan ) of hukm shar`i this section is exclusively concerned with the
legal capacity of the mahkum `alayh , that is, the person to whom the hukm  is addressed, and it looks
into the question of whether he is capable of understanding the demand that is addressed to him and
whether he comprehends the grounds of his responsibility ( taklif ). Since the possession of the mental
faculty of ` aql is the basic criterion of taklif , the law concerns itself with the circumstances that affect
the sanity and capacity of the individual, such as minority, insanity, duress, intoxication, interdiction
(hajr) and mistake.
Legal capacity is primarily divided into two types: capacity to receive or inhere rights and obligations,
referred to as ahliyyah al-wujub , and capacity for the active exercise of rights and obligations, which is
referred to as ahliyyah al-ada' . The former may be described as `receptive legal capacity', and the latter
as 'active legal capacity'.[70. Cf. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 217.]Every person is endowed with legal capacity of one kind or another. Receptive legal capacity is the
ability of the individual to receive rights and obligations on a limited scale, whereas active legal
capacity enables him to fulfill rights and discharge obligations, to effect valid acts and transactions, and
in bear full responsibility toward God and his fellow human beings. The criterion of the existence of
receptive legal capacity is life itself, whereas the criterion of active legal capacity is maturity of
intellect. Receptive legal capacity is vested in every human being, competent or otherwise. An insane
person, a foetus in the womb, a minor and a foolish person ( safih ), whether in good health or in illness:
all possess legal capacity by virtue of their dignity as human beings.[71. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 136. ]Active legal capacity is only acquired upon attaining a certain level of intellectual maturity and
competence. Only a person who understands his acts and his words is competent to conclude a contract,
discharge an obligation, or be punished for violating the law. Active legal capacity, which is the basis of
responsibility ( taklif ), is founded in the capacity of the mind to understand and to discern. But since

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 305intelligence and discernment are hidden qualities which are not readily apparent to the senses, the law
has linked personal responsibility with the attainment of the age of majority ( bulugh ), which is an
obvious phenomenon and can be established by factual evidence. However, it is the intellectual faculty
of the individual rather than age as such which determines his legal capacity. This is why an adult who
is insane, or an adult of any age who is asleep, is not held responsible for his conduct. The principle
here is dearly stated in the Hadith which provides: `The pen is lifted from three persons: the one who is
asleep until he wakes, the child until he attains puberty, and the insane person until he regains sanity. [72.
Tabrizi, Mishkat , II, 980, Hadith no. 3287. ]Receptive legal capacity may either be 'deficient' or 'complete'. The receptive legal capacity of a child
in the womb is incomplete in the sense that it can only receive certain rights, such as inheritance and
bequest, but cannot bear any obligation toward others. Receptive legal capacity is complete when a
person can both have rights and bear obligations. This type of legal capacity is acquired by every
human being as of the moment of birth. During its infancy and later stages of childhood, a child is
capable of discharging, albeit through his guardian, certain obligations in respect, for example, of
maintenance, liability for loss ( daman ), and payment for services rendered to him.
As for the active legal capacity, three possible situations are envisaged. First, a person may be totally
lacking of active legal capacity, as in the case of a child during infancy or an insane person of any age.
Since neither is endowed with the faculty of intellect, no legal consequences accrue from their words
and acts. When a child or a madman kills someone or destroys the property of another person, they can
only be held liable with reference to their property, but not to their persons. They cannot be subjected,
for example, to retaliation, or to any other type of punishment.
Second, a person may be partially lacking in active legal capacity. Thus a discerning child ( al-sabi al-
mumayyiz ), that is, a child between seven and fifteen years of age, or an idiot ( ma'tuh ) who is neither
insane nor totally lacking in intellect but whose intellect is defective and weak, possess a legal capacity
which is deficient. Both of them possess an active legal capacity which is incomplete and partial.[73. An
idiot ( ma`tuh ) is a person who is markedly def ective of understanding. A foolish and reckless person ( sufih ) is also regarded as being of defective legal capacity, in
a lesser degree than the ma'tuh . Cf. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 240.] The discerning child and the idiot are capable only of
concluding acts and transactions that are totally to their benefit, such as accepting a gift or charity, even
without the permission of their guardians. But if the transaction in question is totally disadvantageous to
them, such as giving a gift or making a will, or pronouncing a divorce, these are not valid at all even it
their guardians happen to approve of them. As for transactions which partake in both benefit and loss,
they are valid but only with the permission of the guardian ( wali), otherwise they are null and void.
Thirdly, active legal capacity is complete upon the attainment of intellectual maturity. Hence every
major person who has acquired this ability is presumed to possess active legal capacity unless there is
evidence to show that he or she is deficient of intellect or insane.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 306Persons who are fully competent may sometimes be put under interdiction ( hajr) with a view to
protecting the rights of others. A person may be interdicted by means of a judicial order which might
restrict his powers to conclude certain transactions. A debtor may thus be interdicted so that the rights
of his creditors may be protected.
A person in his death-illness ( marad al-mawt ) is also deficient of legal capacity, as severe illness and
fear of imminent death affect the physical and mental faculties of the individual. But ordinary illness
and other conditions which do not impair the intellectual capacity of a person have no bearing on his
active legal capacity. This is partly why Imam Abu Hanifah has differed with the majority of jurists by
holding the view that foolishness ( safahah ), indebtedness and carelessness ( ghaflah ), do not affect the
active legal capacity of a person. Abu Hanifah refuses to accept these as proper grounds of interdiction,
as in his view the benefit of interdiction in these cases is far outweighed by its possible harm.[74. Khallaf,
`Ilm, p.140; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 220.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 307Chapter Eighteen: Conflict of EvidencesConflict ( ta`arud ) occurs when each of two evidences of equal strength requires the opposite of the
other. This would mean that if one of them affirms something, the other would negate it at the same
time and place. A conflict is thus not expected to arise between two evidences of unequal strength, as in
this case the stronger of the two evidences would naturally prevail. Thus a genuine conflict cannot arise
between a definitive ( qat'i) and a speculative ( zanni ) evidence, nor could there be a conflict between the
nass and ijma' , nor between ijma` and qiyas,  as some of these are stronger than others and would
prevail over them. A conflict may, however, be encountered between two texts of the Qur'an, or
between two rulings of Hadith, or between a Qur'anic ayah  and a Mutawatir  Hadith, or between two
non-Mutawatir  Hadith, or between two rulings of qiyas . When there is a conflict between two Qur'anic
ayat, or between one Hadith and a pair of ahadith , or between one qiyas  and a pair of analogies, it is a
case of conflict between equals, because strength does not consist in number and consequently a single
ayah , Hadith or qiyas  is not necessarily set aside to make room for the pair. The strength of two
conflicting evidences is determined by reference to the evidence itself or to the extraneous/additional
factors which might tip the balance in favour of the one over the other. For example, of the two
conflicting solitary or Ahad  Hadith, the one which is narrated by a faqih  is considered to be stronger
than that which is narrated by, non-faqih. [1. Badran, Usul , p. 461; Khudari, Usul , p. 359; Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 66.]Conflict can only arise between two evidences which cannot be reconciled, in the sense that the subject-
matter of one cannot be distinguished from the other, nor can they be so distinguished in respect of the
time of their application. There are, for example, three different rulings in the Qur'an on wine-drinking,
but since they were each revealed one after the other, not simultaneously, there is consequently no case
of conflict between them. Similarly, if investigation reveals that each of two apparently conflicting rules
can be applied to the same issue under a different set of circumstances, then once again there will be no
conflict.
A genuine conflict can arise between two speculative ( zanni ) evidences, but not between definitive
(qat`i ) proofs. In this way, all cases of conflict between the definitive rulings of the Qur'an and Sunnah
are deemed to be instances of apparent, not genuine, conflict. Furthermore, the ulema have maintained
the view that a genuine conflict between two ayat or two ahadith , or between an ayah  and a Hadith,
does not arise; whenever a conflict is observed between these proofs, it is deemed to be only apparent
(zahiri ), and lacking in reality and substance. For the all-pervasive wisdom of the Lawgiver cannot
countenance the enactment of contradictory laws. It is only the mujtahid  who is deemed unable to
envision the purpose and intention of the Lawgiver in its entirety who may therefore find cases of
apparent conflict in the divinely-revealed law. Only in cases of evident abrogation ( naskh ), which are

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 308largely identified and determined by the Prophet himself, could it be said that a genuine conflict had
existed between the rulings of divine revelation.[2. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II. 126; Khallaf, 'Ilm, p. 230.] When there is a case
of apparent conflict between the rulings of the nusus , one must try to discover the objective of the
Lawgiver and remove the conflict in the light of that objective. Indeed, the rules of reconciliation and
preference proceed on the assumption that no genuine conflict can exist in the divine laws; hence it
becomes necessary to reconcile them or to prefer one to the other. This would mean that either both or
at least one of the evidences at issue can be retained and implemented. The mujtahid  must therefore try
to reconcile them as far as possible, but if he reaches the conclusion that they cannot be reconciled, then
he must attempt to prefer one over the other. If the attempt at reconciliation and preference fails, then
one must ascertain whether recourse can be had to abrogation, which should be considered as the last
resort. But when abrogation also fails to offer a way out of the problem, then action must be suspended
altogether and both of the conflicting texts are abandoned.[3. Khallaf, ` Ilm; p. 229; Khudari, Usul , p.359.]A case of conflict between the  nusus and ijma' , or between two rulings of the latter, is inconceivable for
the obvious reason that no ijma' can be concluded which is contrary to the Qur'an and Sunnah  in the
first place. Should a conflict arise between two analogies or proofs other than the nusus  and ijma' ; and
neither can be given preference over the other and they cannot be reconciled, both must be suspended.
Abrogation in this case does not offer an alternative course of action. For abrogation is basically
confined to the definitive rulings of the Qur'an and Sunnah ; it is irrelevant to ijma' and can be of little
help in cases of conflict between speculative evidences.
Among the many instances of abrogation which the ulema have identified in the Qur'an, we may refer
to only two; but in both cases a closer analysis will show that the conflict at issue is not genuine. Our
first illustration is concerned with the precise duration of the waiting period ( 'iddah ) of widows.
According to one of the two ayat on this subject (al-Baqarah, 2:234), the widow must observe a `iddah
of four months and ten days following the death of her husband. This ayah  consists of a general
provision which applies to every widow regardless as to whether she is pregnant at the time her
husband dies or not. But elsewhere in the Qur'an, there is another ruling concerning the `iddah of
pregnant women. This ayah  (al-Talaq, 65:4) also conveys a general ruling to the effect that the `iddah
of pregnant women continues until the delivery of the child. This ruling also applies to a pregnant
widow, who must wait until the termination of her pregnancy. Thus a pregnant woman whose husband
dies and who gives birth to a child on the same day would have completed her ` iddah  according to the
second of the two rulings, whereas she must, under the first ruling, still wait for four months and ten
days. The two texts thus appear to be in conflict regarding the ` iddah  of a pregnant widow.
For a second illustration of an apparent conflict in the Qur'an, we refer to the two texts concerning the
validity of making a bequest to one's relatives. This is explicitly permitted in sura al-Baqarah (2:180)
which provides: `It is prescribed when death approaches any of you, if he leaves any assets, that he
makes a bequest to his parents and relatives.' This ruling is deemed to have been abrogated by another

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 309text (al-Nisa', 4:11) which prescribes for each of the close relatives a share in inheritance. This share is
obviously determined, not by the will of the testator, but by the will of God. The two texts thus appear
to be in conflict; however the conflict is not genuine as they can be reconciled, and both can be
implemented under different circumstances. The first of the two rulings may, for example, be reserved
for a situation where the parent, of the testator are barred from inheritance by a disability such as
difference of religion. Since the parents in this case would be excluded from the scope of the second
ayah , the conflict would consequently not arise and there would be no case for abrogation. The same
approach can be taken regarding the foregoing ayat on the waiting period of widows. Whereas the first
of the two texts prescribed the ` iddah  of widows to be four months and ten days, the second enacted the
`iddah  of pregnant women until the termination of pregnancy. The two texts could be reconciled if
widows were to observe whichever of the two periods were the longer. If the pregnant widow delivers
her child before the expiry of four months and ten days following the death of her husband, then she
should wait until this period expires. But if she waits four months and ten days and has still not
delivered the child, then her ` iddah should continue until the birth of the child. Thus the apparent
conflict between the ayat under discussion is removed by recourse to specification ( takhsis ): the second
ayah  in this case specifies the general ruling of the first insofar as it concerns pregnant widows.[4. Abu
Zahrah, Usul , p.245; Ba dran, Usul , p. 467; Khallaf, `Ilm; p.231.]To reconcile two evidences both of which are general ( 'Amm ), one may distinguish the scope and
subject-matter of their application from one another by recourse to allegorical interpretation ( ta'wil ).
Supposing there were two conflicting orders on salah , one providing that ` salah  is obligatory on my
ummah ' and the other that ` salah  is not obligatory on my ummah .' To reconcile these two, one may
assume the first to have contemplated the adult and competent members of the community and the
second the minors and lunatics. If this is not possible, then the two rulings may be distinguished in
regard to the notes of their respective application, or they might be assumed to have each envisaged a
different set of circumstances. It is possible that one or both of the two rulings are in the nature of a
manifest ( Zahir ) provision and may thus be open to  ta'wil . The Zahir may be given an interpretation
other than that of its obvious meaning so as to avoid a clash. This may be illustrated by the two
apparently conflicting Hadiths on the subject of testimony. In the first of the two reports, the Prophet is
quoted to have addressed an audience as follows: `Should I inform you who makes the best of
witnesses?' To this, the audience responded, `Yes O Messenger of God', and the Prophet said, `It is one
who gives testimony before he is requested to do so.' [5. Muslim, Sahih , p. 281, Hadith no. 1059; Badran, Usul , p. 465.]However, according to another Hadith, the Prophet said, 'The best generation is the one in which I live,
then the generation after that and then the next one, but after that there will be people who will give
testimony although they are not invited to give it.' [6. Tabrizi, Mishkat , III, 1695, Hadith no. 6001. ]Thus the first Hadith recommends something which the second seems to be discouraging. The best form
of testimony under the first Hadith is unsolicited testimony, whereas this is frowned upon in the second.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 310Since neither of the two Hadith have specified a particular context, it is suggested by way of  ta'wil that
the first Hadith contemplates the Rights of God ( huquq Allah ) whereas the second Hadith contemplates
the Rights of Men ( huquq al-'ibad ). In this way, the apparent conflict between the two texts is removed
through an allegorical interpretation. [7. Badran, Usul , pp. 466.]Allegorical interpretations may offer a solution even in cases where two conflicting orders are both
specific ( Khass ). Recourse to ta'wil  in this case would once again serve the purpose of distinguishing
the subject matter and scope of each of the two conflicting orders. For example, if Ahmad issues two
orders to his employee, one of which tells the latter to 'pay 1000 dinars to Zayd' and the other tells him
`do not pay 1000 dinars to Zayd', then if circumstances would so permit, the first order may be assumed
to have contemplated normal relations between Zayd and Ahmad while the second had envisaged a
hostile situation between the two parties. [8. Cf. Khudari, Usul , p. 361.]In the event where one of the two conflicting rulings is general ( 'Amm ) and the other specific ( Khass ),
they can be reconciled by excepting the latter from the scope of the former through a procedure which
is known as takhsis al-`Amm , that is, `specifying a part of the general'. This would once again mean that
each of the two rulings applied separately from one another to a different subject-matter, and both can
remain operative. Similarly, a text may be absolute in its wording and appear to be in conflict with
another text. They could be reconciled and the conflict between them removed if one of them is so
interpreted as to limit and qualify the absolute terms of the other. Examples to illustrate these and other
methods of interpretation can be found in the separate chapter of this work devoted to the rules of
interpretation.
Should the attempt at reconciliation fail, the next step in resolving a conflict, as stated above, is to give
preference to one over the other. Investigation may reveal that one of the two texts is supported by
stronger evidence, in which case we are basically dealing with two texts of unequal strength. To prefer
the one over the other in this case may even amount to a form of clarification or explanation of one by
the other. Inequality in strength may be in content ( matn ) or in proof of authenticity ( riwayah ). The
former is concerned with the clarity or otherwise of the language of the text, and the latter with the
historical reliability of the transmitters. Preference on the basis of content would require that the literal
is preferred to the metaphorical, the clear ( Sarih ) to the implicit ( Kinayah ), the explicit meaning
(`ibarah al-nass ) to the allusive meaning ( isharah al-nass ), and the latter is preferred to the inferred
meaning of the text ( dalalah al-nass ). Similarly, words which convey greater clarity are to be preferred
to those which are less clear. Thus the Muhkam  (perspicuous) will be preferred to the Mufassar
(unequivocal), the latter to the Nass (explicit) and the Nass  to the Zahir  (manifest). Among unclear
words, the Khafi  (obscure) takes priority over the Mushkil  (difficult), the latter over the Mujmal
(ambivalent) and the Mujmal  over the Mutashabih  (intricate), in an order of priority which again has
been stated elsewhere under the rules of interpretation.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 311Inequality in respect of transmission is mainly concerned with the Hadith: when, for example, the
Mutawatir  is compared to the Mashhur , the former is preferred to the latter. Similarly the Mashhur
takes priority over the solitary ( Ahad ) Hadith, and the report of a transmitter who is faqih  is preferred to
the report of a transmitter who is not. Reports by persons who are known to be retentive of memory
take priority over those which are transmitted by persons whose retentiveness is uncertain. On a similar
note, ahadith  that are transmitted by leading Companions are given preference to those transmitted by
Companions who are less well known for their prominence and continuity of contact with the Prophet.
The Hanafis also consider the action of the transmitter upon his own narration to be a supportive factor
which adds to the strength of a Hadith. The Malikis on the other hand prefer a Hadith that is in
agreement with the practice of the people of Madinah over one which is not. Similarly, the report of a
transmitter who is directly involved in an incident is preferable to other reports. Thus with the Hadith
which is reported by the Prophet's wife Maymunah, to the effect that the Prophet married her while both
of them were  halal , that is outside the sacred state of ihram  for the hajj ceremonies; this report is
preferred to that of Ibn `Abbas to the effect that the Prophet married Maymunah while he was in the
sacred state of ihram.[9. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 486-87, Hadith, no. 1839 and 1840; Ghazal i, Mustasfa , II, 128; Khudari, Usul, p. 367.] In this
way, a Hadith which is supported by a more reliable chain of transmission is preferred to a Hadith
which is weak in its proof of authenticity.
At times the mujtahid  may be confronted with a situation where each of the two conflicting Hadiths is
stronger in respect of some of these factors but weaker in regard to others, in which case it is for the
mujtahid  to assess and determine the overall strength or weakness of the Hadith according to his own
ijtihad .
The ulema of Hadith are in agreement that a Hadith which is reported by all the six imams of Hadith,
namely al-Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, al-Nasa'i, al-Tirmidhi, and Ibn Majah, takes priority over that
which might have been reported only by some and not all of these authorities. Among ahadith  which
are not reported by all the six authorities, those which are reported by the first two are preferred, and if
one of the two conflicting Hadith is reported by al-Bukhari and the other by Muslim, the former is
preferred to the latter.[10. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 246.]According to another rule of preference, affirmative evidence takes priority over the negative. This may
be illustrated by the two rulings of Hadith concerning the right of a slave-woman to a divorce upon her
release from slavery. It is reported that a slave woman by the name of Barirah was owned by `A'ishah
and was married to another slave, Mughith. `A'ishah set her free, and she wanted to be separated from
Mughith, who was still a slave. The case was brought to the attention of the Prophet, who gave Barirah
the choice either to remain married to Mughith or be separated. But a second report on the same subject
informs us that Barirah's husband was a free man when she was emancipated. The two reports are thus
conflicting with regard to the status of the husband. But since it is known for certain that Mughith was
originally a slave, and there is no dispute over this, the report which negates this original state is

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 312therefore ignored in view of the general rule that the affirmative, that is, the evidence which affirms
continuation of the original state, takes priority over that which negates it. The jurists have
consequently held that when a slave-woman is set free while married to a slave, she will have the
choice of repudiating or retaining the marriage. If the husband is a free man, she will have no such
choice according to Malik, Shafi'i, and the majority of scholars. Abu Hanifah, however, maintains that
she will have the option even when her husband is a free man.[11. Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 601-602, Hadith nos. 2223-7 and
footnote no. 1548; Badran, Usul , p. 465; Khudari, Usul , p.367.]Another rule of preference which may be mentioned briefly is that prohibition takes priority over
permissibility. Thus if there are two conflicting rules of equal strength on the same issue, one
prohibitory and the other permissive, the former will take priority over the latter. Having said this,
however, it is possible that the mujtahid  may depart from this rule and instead apply that which brings
ease in preference to the one that entails hardship.[12. Khallaf, ` Ilm, p. 232; Badran, Usul , p. 470; Khudari, Usul , p. 367.]If the attempt at reconciling two conflicting texts, or at preferring one over the other, have both failed,
recourse may be had to abrogation. This would necessitate an enquiry into the occasions of revelation
(asbab al-nuzul ), the relevant materials in the Sunnah , and the chronological order between the two
texts. If this also proves unfeasible, then action must be suspended on both and the mujtahid may resort
to inferior evidences in order to determine the ruling for the issue. Thus if the conflict happens to be
between two rulings of the Qur'an, he may depart from both and determine the matter with reference to
the Sunnah . Should there be a conflict between two rulings of the Sunnah , then the mujtahid may refer,
in a descending order, to the fatwa  of Companions, and failing that the issue may be determined on
grounds of qiyas . However, if the mujtahid  fails to find a ruling in any of the lower categories of proofs,
then he may resort to the general norms of Shari'ah  that may be applicable to the case. These may be
illustrated in the following example. A conflict is encountered between the two rulings of Qur'an
concerning the recitation of the portions of the Qur'an in congregational prayers. The question which
needs to be answered is, whether in a congregational salah , the congregation member, that is the
muqtadi , is required to recite the sura al-Fatihah after the imam, or whether he should remain silent.
Two conflicting answers can be derived for this question from the Qur'an. The first of the two ayat
under discussion provides: `And when the Qur'an is being read, listen to it attentively and pay heed, so
that you may receive mercy' (al-A'raf, 7:204). It would appear that the muqtadi , according to this a yah,
should remain silent when the imam recites the Qur'an. However, according to another ayah , everyone,
that is both the imam and the muqtadi,  is ordered to `read whatever is easy for you of the Qur'an' (al-
Muzammil, 73:20). Although neither of the two texts make a particular reference to salah , they appear
nevertheless to be in conflict with regard to the position of the muqtadi . There is no additional evidence
available to enable the preference of one to the other; action is therefore suspended on both and the
issue is determined with reference to the Sunnah . It is thus reported that on one occasion when the
Prophet led the salah , he asked the members of the congregation whether they recited the Qur'an with
him, and having heard their answers, he instructed them not to recite the Qur'an behind the imam. But

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 313there still remains a measure of inconsistency even in the ahadith that are reported on this point, which
would explain why the jurists have also differed on it: Abu Hanifah, Malik, Ibn Hanbal, and al-Shafi'i
(according to his former view which he revised later) have held that it is not necessary to recite al-
Fatihah behind the imam in those prayers in which he recites the Qur'an aloud, but that when the imam
recites quietly, the worshippers should recite al-Fatihah. The later Hanafi jurists have, however, held the
view that it is not necessary for the worshipper to recite the Qur'an behind the imam in either case. [13.
Abu Dawud, Sunan , II, 211, Hadith no. 825 and footnote no. 373; Badran, Usul , pp. 468-69; Khudari, Usul , p. 359.]In the event where an issue cannot be determined by reference to the Sunnah , the mujtahid  may resort
to the fatwa  of a Companion, and failing that, to qiyas. There  is, for example, an apparent conflict
between the two reports concerning the way that the Prophet performed the salat al-kusuf , that is,
prayer offered on the occasion of a solar eclipse. According to one of the reports, the Prophet offered
two units (i.e. two rak'ahs ) of salah , each consisting of two bowings ( ruku`) and two prostration,
(sajdah ). But according to another report, each of the two units contained four bowings and four
prostrations. There is yet another report to the effect that each of the two rak'ahs contained three
bowing, and three prostrations.[14. Abu Dawud, Sunan , I, 304, Hadith nos. 1173-7.] The conflicting contents of these
reports can neither be reconciled nor given preference one over the other. Hence action is suspended on
all and the matter is determined on grounds of qiyas . In this case, since salat al-kusuf is a variety of
salah , the normal rules of salah  are applied to it. Since all obligatory salah , without any variation,
contains one bowing and two prostrations, this is also by way of analogy extended to salat al-kusuf . [15.
Badran, Usul , p.469.]In the event of a conflict occurring between two analogies, if they cannot be reconciled with one
another, then one of them must be given preference. The qiyas  whose effective cause ( 'illah ) is stated in
an explicit text is to be preferred to the one whose 'illah has been derived through inference ( istinbat ).
Similarly, a qiyas  whose ` illah is founded in an allusive text ( isharah al-nass ) takes priority over qiyas
whose 'illah is merely a proper or reasonable attribute which is derived through inference and ijtihad .
When the 'illah of qiyas  is explicitly stated in the nass or when the result of qiyas  is upheld by ijma' , no
conflict is expected to arise. In the unlikely event when the mujtahid  constructs an analogy on the basis
of an inferred effective cause (  'illah mustanbatah ) while the `illah is explicitly stated in the nass, and
he reaches a divergent result, it is put down to his ignorance of the nass, and the result that he has
reached will be ignored.[16. Khallaf, 'Ilm, p.232; Badran,  Usul , p. 470.]A conflict may well arise between two analogies which are both founded on an inferred ` illah, since this
type of ` illah involves a measure of speculative reasoning and ijtihad . Two mujtahids  may thus arrive at
different conclusions with regard to the identification of an 'illah . This is, for example, the case
regarding the `illah of compulsory guardianship ( wilayah al-ijbar ) in the marriage of a minor girl.
Imam Abu Hanifah considers the 'illah of the guardian's power of ijbar  in marriage to be the minority
of the ward, whereas Imam Shafi'i considers the 'illah to be her virginity. This difference of ijtihad

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 314would in turn give rise to analogies whose results diverge from one another depending on which of the
two effective causes they are based on. However, differences of this nature are tolerated and neither of
the two Imams have attempted to discourage diversity in ijtihad . In the event where neither of the two
conflicting analogies can be preferred to the other, it is for the mujtahid to choose the one that seems
good to him even if there is no basis for such preference other than his own personal opinion.[17. Abu Zahrah,
Usul , pp. 247-48; Khudari, Usul , p.360.]If none of the foregoing methods can be applied in order to determine the ruling of an issue, then the
mujtahid  may base his decision on the original norms of the Shari'ah . This would be done on the
assumption that no specific indication could be found in the Shari'ah  on the case. An example of this is
to determine the ruling of the Shari`ah that might have to be applied to a hermaphrodite whose gender,
whether male or female, cannot be determined and where neither side could be preferred to the other. A
recourse to the original norms in this case means that the issue remains where it was in the first place.
Since neither of the two possibilities can be preferred to the other, action will be based on one side or
the other, not because of any evidence to warrant such a preference but as a precautionary measure
when the circumstances may indicate such a course of action. Thus in some situations, in the
distribution of shares in inheritance, for example, the hermaphrodite will be presumed a male, while he
will be presumed a female in other situations as considerations of caution and prevention of possible
harm to him may suggest. [18. Badran, Usul , pp. 469-70.]In making such decisions, it is essential that the mujtahid  does not act against the general principles and
spirit of the Shari'ah . When he weighs the merits and demerits of conflicting evidences he must never
lose sight of the basic objectives of the Lawgiver.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 315Chapter Nineteen: Ijtihad , or Personal ReasoningIjtihad  is the most important source of Islamic law next to the Qur'an and the Sunnah . The main
difference between ijtihad  and the revealed sources of the Shari'ah  lies in the fact that ijtihad  is a
continuous process of development whereas divine revelation and prophetic legislation discontinued
upon the demise of the Prophet. In this sense, ijtihad  continues to be the main instrument of interpreting
the divine message and relating it to the changing conditions of the Muslim community in its
aspirations to attain justice, salvation and truth.
Since  ijtihad derives its validity from divine revelation, its propriety is measured by its harmony with
the Qur'an and the Sunnah . The sources of Islamic law are therefore essentially monolithic, and the
commonly accepted division of the roots of jurisprudence into the primary and secondary is somewhat
formal rather than real. The essential unity of the Shari'ah  lies in the degree of harmony that is achieved
between revelation and reason. Ijtihad  is the principal instrument of maintaining this harmony. The
various sources of Islamic law that feature next to the Qur'an and the Sunnah  are all manifestations of
ijtihad , albeit with differences that are largely procedural in character. In this way, consensus of
opinion, analogy, juristic preference, considerations of public interest ( maslahah ), etc., are all inter-
related not only under the main heading of ijtihad , but via it to the Qur'an and the Sunnah .[1. Amin Islahi
(Islamic Law , p. 109) has thus aptly stated that: 'There are three prominent and fundamental sources of Islamic Law: the Holy Qur'an, the Sunnah  of the holy
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and ijtihad .] It is partly due to the formalistic character of these sub-divisions that they are often
found to be overlapping and concurrent. Thus a ruling of ijma' is often based on analogy, maslahah , or
istihsan , and so on, despite its being designated as ijma' . Similarly, qiyas  and istihsan  are closely related
to one another in the sense that one of the two main varieties of istihsan consists of a selection between
two analogies on the same issue. The difference between maslahah  and istihsan is largely procedural,
for they are essentially the same, the one being reflective of the Maliki and the other of the Hanafi
approach to ijtihad . It is thus evident that all the non-revealed proofs of Shari'ah  are an embodiment of
the single phenomenon of ijtihad .
Being a derivation from the root word jahada , ijtihad  literally means striving, or self-exertion in any
activity which entails a measure of hardship. It would thus be in order to use jahada  in respect of one
who carries a heavy load, but not so if he carries only a trivial weight. Juridically, however, ijtihad
mainly consists not of physical, but of intellectual exertion on the part of the jurist. Ijtihad  is defined as
the total expenditure of effort made by a jurist in order to infer, with a degree of probability, the rules of
Shari'ah  from their detailed evidence in the sources.[2. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 162; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 250; Khudari, Usul , p. 367.]Some ulema have defined ijtihad  as the application by a jurist of all his faculties either in inferring the
rules of Shari'ah  from their sources, or in implementing such rules and applying them to particular

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 316issues.[3. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.301.] Ijtihad  essentially consists of an inference ( istinbat ) that amounts to a
probability ( zann ), thereby excluding the extraction of a ruling from a clear text. It also excludes the
discovery of a hukm  by asking a learned person or by consulting the relevant literature without the
exercise of one's own opinion and judgment. Thus a person who knows the rules of Shari'ah  in detail
but is unable to exercise his judgment in the inference of the ahkam  direct from their sources is not a
mujtahid . Ijtihad , in other words, consists of the formulation of an opinion in regard to a hukm shar'i .
The presence of an element of speculation in ijtihad  implies that the result arrived at is probably correct,
while the possibility of its being erroneous is not excluded. Zann  in this context is distinguished from
'ilm, which implies positive knowledge. Since the decisive rules of Shari'ah  impart positive knowledge,
they are excluded from the scope of ijtihad .[4. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 250; Zuhayr, Usul, IV, 223-25; Badran, Usul , p. 471.] Essential
to the meaning of ijtihad  is also the concept that the endeavour of the jurist involves a total expenditure
of effort in such a manner that the jurist feels an inability to exert himself further. If the jurist has failed
to discover the evidence which he was capable of discovering, his opinion is void.[5. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 102;
Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 162. ] And lastly, the definition of ijtihad  is explicit on the point that only a jurist ( faqih ) may
practice ijtihad . This is explained by the requirements of ijtihad , namely the qualifications that must be
fulfilled for attainment to the rank of mujtahid . When these requirements are met, it is inevitable that
the mujtahid  must also be a faqih . Thus the definition of ijtihad  precludes self-exertion by a layman in
the inference of ahkam .[6. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 250.]The subject of ijtihad  must be a question of Shari'ah ; more specifically, ijtihad  is concerned with the
practical rules of Shari'ah  which usually regulate the conduct of those to whom they apply (i.e. the
mukallaf ). This would preclude from the scope of ijtihad  purely intellectual (` aqli) and customary ( urfi)
issues, or matters that are perceptible to the senses ( hissi) and do not involve the inference of a hukm
shar'i from the evidence present in the sources. Thus ijtihad  may not be exercised in regard to such
issues as the createdness of the universe, the existence of a Creator, the sending of prophets, and so
forth, because there is only one correct view in regard to these matters, and any one who differs from it
is wrong. Similarly, one may not exercise  ijtihad on matters such as the obligatory status of the pillars
of the faith, or the prohibition of murder, theft, and adultery. For these are evident truths of the Shari'ah
which are determined in the explicit statements of the text.[7. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 252; Zuhayr, Usul, IV, 225; Aghnides,
Muhammedan Theories , p. 91; Badran, Usul , p. 471.]The detailed evidences found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah  are divided into four types, as follows.
1) Evidence which is decisive both in respect of authenticity and meaning.
2) Evidence which is authentic but speculative in meaning.
3) That which is of doubtful authenticity, but definite in meaning.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 3174) Evidence which is speculative in respect both of authenticity and meaning.
Ijtihad  does not apply to the first of the foregoing categories, such as the clear nusus  concerning the
prescribed penalties ( hudud ). But ijtihad  can validly operate in regard to any of the remaining three
types of evidence, as the following illustrations will show:
1) An example of  ijtihad concerning evidence which is definite of proof but speculative of meaning is
the Qur'anic text in sura al-Baqarah (2:228): 'The divorced women must observe three courses ( quru' )
upon themselves.' There is no doubt concerning the authenticity of this text, as the Qur'an is authentic
throughout. However its meaning, in particular the precise meaning of the word quru' , is open to
speculation. Quru' is a homonym meaning both `menstruations' and `the clean periods between
menstruations'. Whereas Imam Abu Hanifah and Ibn Hanbal have adopted the former, Imam Shafi'i and
Malik have adopted the latter meaning, and their respective ijtihad  leads them to correspondingly
different results.[8. Kassab, Adwa' , p. 29; Badran, Usul , p. 473.]2) Ijtihad  in regard to the second variety of evidence relates mainly to Hadith material, which may have
a definitive meaning but whose authenticity is open to doubt. To give an example, the Hadith which
provides in regard to zakah  on camels that `a goat is to be levied on every five camels.'[9. Abu Dawud, Sunan
(Hasan's trans.), II, 407, Hadith no. 1562.] has a clear meaning, which is why the jurists are in agreement that there is
no zakah on less than five camels. But since this is a solitary Hadith, its authenticity remains
speculative. Ijtihad  concerning this Hadith may take the form of an investigation into the authenticity of
its transmission and the reliability of its narrators, matters on which the jurists are not unanimous due to
the different criteria that they apply.
This would in turn lead them to different conclusions. Should the differences of ijtihad  and the rulings
so arrived at be conflicting to the point that no reliance can be placed on any, they are all to be
abandoned and no obligation may be established on their basis.[10. Kassab, Adwa' , p. 30; Badran, Usul , p. 474.]3) To give an example of ijtihad  concerning evidence that is speculative in both authenticity and
meaning, we may refer to the Hadith which provides: 'There is no salah  [la salata ] without the
recitation of sura al-Fatihah.' [11. Abu Dawud, Sunan  (Hasan's trans.), I, 209, Hadith no. 819.]Being a solitary Hadith, its authenticity is not proven with certainty. Similarly it is open to different
interpretations in the sense that it could mean either that salah  without the Fatihah is invalid, or that it is
merely incomplete. The Hanafis have held the latter, whereas the Shafi'is have adopted the former
meaning of the Hadith.

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 318And finally with regard to such matters on which no evidence can be found in the nusus  or ijma`, ijtihad
may take the form of analogical deduction, juristic preference ( istihsan ), or the consideration of public
interest ( maslahah ), and so on.The Value ( Hukm ) of IjtihadLegal theory in all of its parts derives its validity from the revealed sources. It is partly for this reason
and partly for the reason of man's duty to worship his Creator that the practice of ijtihad  is a religious
duty. The ulema are in agreement that ijtihad  is the collective obligation ( fard kafa'i ) of all qualified
jurists in the event where an issue arises but no urgency is encountered over its ruling. The duty remains
unfulfilled until it is performed by at least one mujtahid . If a question is addressed to two mujtahids , or
to two judges for that matter, and one of them exerts himself to formulate a response, the other is
absolved of his duty. But  ijtihad becomes a personal obligation ( wajib  or fard `ayn ) of the qualified
mujtahid  in urgent cases, that is, when there is fear that the cause of justice or truth may be lost if
ijtihad  is not immediately attempted. This is particularly the case when no other qualified person can be
found to attempt ijtihad . With regard to the mujtahid  himself, ijtihad  is a wajib 'ayni : he must practice
ijtihad  in order to find the ruling for an issue that affects him personally. This is so because imitation
(taqlid ) is forbidden to a mujtahid  who is capable of deducing the hukm  directly from the sources.
Should there be no urgency over  ijtihad , or in the event where other mujtahids  are available, then the
duty remains as a fard kafa'i only. Furthermore, ijtihad  is recommended ( mandub ) in all cases where no
particular issue has been referred to the mujtahid , or when it is attempted in the absence of an issue by
way of theoretical construction at the initiative of the jurist himself. And finally ijtihad  is forbidden
(haram ) when it contradicts the decisive rules of the Qur'an, the Sunnah  and a definite ijma' .[12. Shawkani,
Irshad , p.235; Khudari, Usul , p.368; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 227.]The ulema of usul are in agreement that the mujtahid  is bound by the result of his own ijtihad . Once he
has deduced the ruling on a particular issue which is founded in his true conviction and belief, he may
not imitate other mujtahids  on that matter regardless as to whether they agree with him or otherwise.
For the mujtahid , the conclusion that he reaches is tantamount to a divine command which he must
observe. It is therefore unlawful for him to abandon it or to follow anyone else in respect of it. But if he
had not rendered his own ijtihad  on an issue which is not urgent, and he has time to investigate, then
according to some ulema he may imitate other mujtahids . However, the preferred view is that he must
avoid taqlid , even of one who might be more learned than him. Only a 'ammi (layman) who is capable
of ijtihad  is allowed to follow the opinion of others.[13. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 121; Amidi,  Ihkam , IV, 204; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 119.]This is considered to be the purport of the Qur'anic command, addressed to all those who have the
capacity and knowledge, to exert themselves in the cause of justice and truth (al-Hashr, 59:2).

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 319Elsewhere we read in the Qur'an (Muhammad, 47:24): 'Will they not meditate on the Qur'an, or do they
have locks on their heart?'
The same conclusion is sustained in another Qur'anic passage, in sura al-Nisa' (4:59) where the text
requires the judgment of all disputes to be referred to God and to His Messenger. These and many
similar ayat in the Qur'an lend support to the conclusion that it is the duty of the learned to study and
investigate the Qur'an and the teachings of the Prophet. The correct meaning of the manifest directives
(Zawahir ) of the Qur'an is also understood from the practice of the Companions who used to investigate
matters, and each would formulate their own ijtihad , in which case they would not imitate anyone
else.[14. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 14; Khudari, Usul ; p. 380. ] The mujtahid  is thus the authority (hujjah) for himself. His is the
duty to provide guidance to those who do not know, but he himself must remain in close contact with
the sources. This is also the purport of another Qur'anic ayah  which enjoins those who do not possess
knowledge: 'Then ask those who have knowledge ( ahl al-dhikr ) if you yourselves do not know' (al-
Nahl, 16:43). Thus only those who do not know may seek guidance from others, not those who have the
ability and knowledge to deduce the correct answer themselves. The ahl al-dhikr in this ayah  refers to
the ulema, regardless as to whether they actually know the correct ruling of an issue or not, provided
they have the capacity to investigate and find out.[15. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 206; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 121.]When a  mujtahid exerts himself and derives the ruling of a particular issue on the basis of probability,
but after a period of time changes his opinion on the same issue, he may set aside or change his initial
ruling if this would only affect him personally. For example, when he enters a contract of marriage with
a woman without the consent of her guardian ( wali) and later changes his opinion on the validity of
such a marriage, he must annul the nikah . But if his ijtihad  affects others when, for example, he acts as
a judge and issues a decision on the basis of his own ijtihad , and then changes his views, he may not,
according to the majority of ulema, set aside his earlier decision. For if one ruling of ijtihad  could be set
aside by another, then the latter must be equally subject to reversal, and this would lead to uncertainty
and loss of credibility in the ahkam . [16. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 14; Khudari, Usul , p. 380. ] It is reported that `Umar b. al-
Khattab adjudicated a case, known as Hajariyyah, in which the deceased, a woman, was survived by her
husband, mother, two consanguine and two uterine brothers. 'Umar b. al-Khattab entitled all the
brothers to a share in one-third of the estate. but was told by one of the parties that the previous year, he
(`Umar) had not entitled all the brothers to share the portion of one-third. To this the caliph replied,
'That was my decision then, but today I have decided it differently.' Thus the Caliph Umar upheld both
his decisions and did not allow his latter decision to affect the validity of the former. [17. Ibn al-Qayyim,  I'lam , I,
177; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 108; Badran, Usul , p. 485.] Similarly, the decision of one judge may not be set aside by another
merely because the latter happens to have a different opinion on the matter. It is reported that a man
whose case was adjudicated by 'Ali and Zayd informed Umar b. al-Khattab of their decision, to which
the latter replied that he would have ruled differently if he were the judge. To this the man replied,
'Then why don't you, as you are the Caliph?' `Umar b. al-Khattab replied that had it been a matter of
applying the Qur'an or the Sunnah , he would have intervened, but since the decision was based in ra'y,

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 320they were all equal in this respect.[18. Ibn al-Qayyim,  I'lam , I, 177; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 108; Badran, Usul , p. 485.] Since in matters of
juristic opinion no-one can be certain that a particular view is wrong, the view that has already been
embodied in a judicial decree has a greater claim to validity than the
opposite view. The position is, however, different if the initial decision is found to be in violation of the
law, in which case it must be set aside. This is the purport of the ruling of `Umar ibn al-Khattab which
he conveyed in his well-known letter to Abu Musa al-Ash'ari as follows: 'After giving a judgment, if
upon reconsideration you arrive at a different opinion, do not let the judgment stand in the way of
retraction. For justice may not be disregarded, and you are to know that it is better to retract than to
persist injustice.' [19. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 120; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 184; Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , I, 71-72; Mahmassani, Falsafah  (Ziadeh's trans.), p. 97.]The precedent of the Companions on this issue has led to the formulation of a legal maxim which
provides that 'ijtihad may not be overruled by its equivalent' ( al-ijtihad la yunqad bi-mithlih ).
Consequently, unless the judge and the mujtahid  is convinced that his previous ijtihad  was erroneous,
he must not attempt to reverse it. Thus a judicial decision which is based on the personal opinion and
ijtihad  of a particular judge-cum- mujtahid  is irreversible on the basis of a mere difference of opinion by
another judge. It is further suggested that the issuing judge himself may change his initial decision
which was based on ijtihad  in a subsequent case if he is convinced that this is a preferable course to
take. But the credibility of judicial decisions is a factor that would discourage the issuing judge to
change his initial decision unless it proves to have been manifestly oppressive.The Proof ( Hujjiyyah ) of IjtihadIjtihad  is validated by the Qur'an, the Sunnah  and the dictates of reason (` aql). Of the first two, the
Sunnah  is more specific in validating ijtihad . The Hadith of Mu`adh b. Jabal, [20. Abu Dawud, Sunan  (Hasan's trans.),
III, 1019, Hadith no 3585. The full version of this Hadith appears at page 218.] as al-Ghazali points out, provides a clear authority
for ijtihad . The same author adds: The claim that this Hadith is mursal  (i.e. a Hadith whose chain of
narration is broken at the point when the name of the Companion who heard it from the Prophet is not
mentioned) is of no account. For the ummah  has accepted it and has consistently relied on it; no further
dispute over its authenticity is therefore warranted.[21. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 63-64.] According to another Hadith,
'When a judge exercises ijtihad  and gives a right judgment, he will have two rewards, but if he errs in
his judgment, he will still have earned one reward.' [22. Abu Dawud, Sunan , III, 1013, Hadith no. 3567.]This Hadith implies that regardless of its results, ijtihad  never partakes in sin. When the necessary
requirements of ijtihad  are present, the result is always meritorious and never blameworthy.[23. Ghazali,
Mustasfa , II, 105; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 186. ] In another Hadith, the Prophet is reported to have said: 'Strive and

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 321endeavour, ( ijtahidu ), for everyone is ordained to accomplish that which he is created for.' [24. Bukhari, Sahih
(Istanbul ed.), VI, 84; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 209. ]There is also the Hadith which reads: 'When God favours one of His servants, He enables him to
acquire knowledge ( tafaqquh ) in religion.' [25. Bukhari, Sahih  (Istanbul ed.), I, 25-26.]The ulema of usul have also quoted in this connection two other ahadith , one of which makes the
pursuit of knowledge an obligation of every Muslim, man or woman, and the other declares the Ulema
to be the successors of the Prophets. [26. Ibn Majah, Sunan , I, 81, Hadith no. 224; Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 230, 234; Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 140. ]The relevance of the last two ahadith  to ijtihad is borne out by the fact that ijtihad  is the main
instrument of creativity and knowledge in Islam.
The numerous Qur'anic ayat that relate to ijtihad  are all in the nature of probabilities ( zawahir ). All the
Qur'anic ayat which the ulema have quoted in support of qiyas  (see page 217) can also be quoted in
support of ijtihad . In addition, we read, in sura al-Tawbah (9:122): 'Let a contingent from each division
of them devote themselves to the study of religion [ li-yatafaqqahu fi'l-din ] and warn their people [. . .]'
Devotion to the study of religion is the essence of ijtihad , which should be a continuous feature of the
life of the community. Although the pursuit of knowledge is a duty of every individual, attaining
tafaqquh , or 'erudition in religious disciplines', is necessary for those who guide the community and
warn them against deviation and ignorance. On a similar note, we read in sura al-Ankabut (29:69): 'And
those who strive [ wa'l-ladhina jahadu ] in Our cause, We will certainly guide them in Our paths.' It is
interesting that in this ayah the word s ubulana ('Our paths') occurs in the plural form, which might
suggest that there are numerous paths toward the truth, which are all open to those who exert
themselves in its pursuit. Furthermore, we read in sura al-Nisa' (4:59): `If you dispute over something,
then refer it to God and to the Messenger.' The implementation of this ayah  would necessitate
knowledge of the Qur'an, the Sunnah  and the objectives ( maqasid ) of the Lawgiver on whose basis
disputed matters could be adjudicated and resolved.
The Companions practiced ijtihad , and their consensus is claimed in support of it.[27. Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , I, 176;
Mahmassani, Falsafah , p.95; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 19.] In their search for solutions to disputed matters, they would base their
judgement on the Qur'an and the Sunnah , but if they failed to find the necessary guidance therein, they
would resort to  ijtihad . The fact that the Companions resorted to ijtihad  in the absence of a nass is
established by continuous testimony ( tawatur ).[28. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 106; Ibn al-Qayyim, I'lam , I, 176; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 19. ]The rational argument in support of ijtihad  is to be sought in the fact that while the nusus  of Shari'ah
are limited, new experiences in the life of the community continue to give rise to new problems. It is
therefore imperative for the learned members of the community to attempt to find solutions to such
problems through ijtihad .[29. Cf. Kassab, Adwa' , p. 20.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 322Conditions ( Shurut ) of IjtihadThe mujtahid  must be a Muslim and a competent person of sound mind who has attained a level of
intellectual competence which enables him to form an independent judgment. In his capacity as a
successor to the Prophet, the mujtahid performs a religious duty, and his verdict is a proof ( hujjah ) to
those who follow him; he must therefore be a Muslim, and be knowledgeable in the various disciplines
of religious learning. A person who fails to meet one or more of the requirements of ijtihad is
disqualified and may not exercise ijtihad . The requirements which are discussed below contemplate
ijtihad in its unrestricted form, often referred to as ijtihad fi'l-shar `, as opposed to the varieties of ijtihad
that are confined to a particular school, or to particular issues within the confines of a given madhhab .
The earliest complete account of the qualifications of a mujtahid  is given in Abu' Husayn al-Basri's (d.
436/1044) al-Mu'tamad fi Usul al-Fiqh . The broad outline of al-Basri's exposition was later accepted,
with minor changes, by al-Shirazi (d. 467/1083), al-Ghazali (d. 505/111 ) and al-Amidi (d. 632/1234).
This does not mean that the requirements of ijtihad  received no attention from the ulema who lived
before al-Basri. But it was from then onwards that they were consistently adopted by the ulema of usul
and became a standard feature of ijtihad .[30. Cf. Hallaq, The Gate , pp. 14-17. ] These requirements are as follows:
(a) Knowledge of Arabic to the extent that enables the scholar to enjoy a correct understanding of the
Qur'an and the Sunnah . A complete command and erudition in Arabic is not a requirement, but the
mujtahid must know the nuances of the language and be able to comprehend the sources accurately and
deduce the ahkam  from them with a high level of competence.[31. Gha zali, Mustasfa , II, 102; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.302.] Al-
Shatibi, however, lays greater emphasis on the knowledge of Arabic: a person who possesses only an
average knowledge of Arabic cannot aim at the highest level of attainment in ijtihad . The language of
the Qur'an and the Sunnah  is the key to their comprehension and the ijtihad  of anyone who is deficient
in this respect is unacceptable. The same author adds: Since the opinion of the mujtahid  is a proof
(hujjah ) for a layman, this degree of authority necessitates direct access to the sources and full
competence in Arabic.[32. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 60.]The mujtahid  must also be knowledgeable in the Qur'an and the Sunnah , the Makki and the Madinese
contents of the Qur'an, the occasions of its revelation ( asbab al-nuzul ) and the incidences of abrogation
therein. More specifically, he must have a full grasp of the legal contents, or the ayat al-ahkam , but not
necessarily of the narratives and parables of the Qur'an and its passages relating to the hereafter.[33.
Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 101.] According to some ulema, including al-Ghazali, Ibn al-Arabi, and Abu Bakr al-Raza,
the legal ayat of the Qur'an which the mujtahid  must know amount to about five hundred. Al-Shawkani,

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 323however, observes that a specification of this kind cannot be definitive. For a  mujtahid may infer a legal
rule from the narratives and parables that are found in the Qur'an. The knowledge of ayat al-ahkam
includes knowledge of the related commentaries ( tafasir ) with special reference to the Sunnah  and the
views of the Companions. Al-Qurtubi's Tafsir al-Qurtubi , and the Ahkam al-Qur'an of Abu Bakr, 'Ali
al-Jesses, are particularly recommended. [34. Shawkani, Irshad , pp. 250-51; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.304; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 226.]Next, the mujtahid  must possess an adequate knowledge of the Sunnah , especially that part of it which
relates to the subject of his ijtihad . This is the view of those who admit the divisibility ( tajzi'ah ) of
ijtihad  (for which see below), but if ijtihad  is deemed to be indivisible, then the mujtahid  must be
knowledgeable of the Sunnah  as a whole, especially with reference to the ahkam  texts, often referred to
as ahadith al-ahkam . He must know the incidences of abrogation in the Sunnah , the general and the
specific,
('amm and khass ), the absolute and the qualified ( mutlaq and muqayyad ), and the reliability or
otherwise of the narrators of Hadith. It is not necessary to commit to memory the ahadith al-ahkam or
the names of their narrators, but he must know where to find the ahadith  when he needs to refer to
them, and be able to distinguish the reliable from the weak and the authentic from the spurious. [35.
Shawkani, Irshad , p.251 ff; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 304.] Imam Ghazali points out that an adequate familiarity with the
ahadith al-ahkam such as those found in Sunan Abi Dawud, Sunan al-Bayhaqi , or the Musnad  of Ibn
Hanbal would suffice. According to another view, which is attributed to Ahmad b. Hanbal, the ahadith
al-ahkam are likely to number in the region of 1200. [36. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 101; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 251.]The mujtahid  must also know the substance of the furu`works and the points on which there is an ijma' .
He should be able to verify the consensus of the Companions, the Successors, and the leading Imams
and mujtahidun  of the past so that he is guarded against the possibility of issuing an opinion contrary to
such an ijma`. It would be rare, al-Shawkani observes, for anyone who has attained the rank of a
mujtahid  not to be aware of the issues on which there is a conclusive ijma`. By implication, the
mujtahid must also be aware of the opposing views, as it is said, 'the most learned of people is also one
who is most knowledgeable of the differences among people'.[37. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 251; Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 101; Abu
Zahrah, Usul , p. 305. ]In their expositions of the qualifications of a mujtahid , the ulema of usul place a special emphasis on
the knowledge of qiyas . The Qur'an and the Sunnah , on the whole, do not completely specify the law as
it might be stated in a juristic manual, but contact general rulings and indications as in the causes of
such rulings. The mujtahid  is thus enabled to have recourse to analogical deduction in order to discover
the ruling for an unprecedented case. An adequate knowledge of the rules and procedures of qiyas  is
thus essential for the mujtahid . Imam Shafi`i has gone so far as to equate  ijtihad with qiyas . Analogy, in
other words, is the main bastion of ijtihad , even if the two are not identical. Al-Ghazali has observed
that notwithstanding the claim by some ulema that qiyas  and ijtihad  are identical and coextensive,

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 324ijtihad  is wider than qiyas  as it comprises methods of reasoning other than analogy.[38. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 54;
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 252; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 306.]Furthermore, the mujtahid  should know the objectives ( maqasid ) of the Shari'ah , which consist of the
masalih  (considerations of public interest). The most important masalih  are those which the Lawgiver
has Himself identified and which must be given priority over others. Thus the protection of the `Five
Principles', namely of his, religion, intellect, lineage and property, are the recognised objectives of the
Lawgiver. These are the essentials ( daruriyyat ) of the masalih  and as such they are distinguished from
the complementary ( hajiyyat ) and the embellishments ( tahsiniyyat ). The mujtahid  must also know the
general maxims of fiqh such as the removal of hardship ( raf`al-haraj ), that certainty must prevail over
doubt, and other such principles which are designed to prevent rigidity in the ahkam . He must be able to
distinguish the genuine masalih  from those which might be inspired by whimsical desires, and be able
to achieve a correct balance between values.[39. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 252; Abu Zahrah, Usul, p.307; Badran, Usul , p. 208.]Al-Shatibi summarises all the foregoing requirements of ijtihad  under two main headings, one of which
is the adequate grasp of the objectives of the Shari'ah , while the other is the knowledge of the sources
and the methods of deduction. The first of these is fundamental, and the second serves as an instrument
of achieving the first.[40. Shatibi, Muwafaqat , IV, 56; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 307.]It is further suggested in this connection that the mujtahid  must be capable of distinguishing strength
and weakness in reasoning and evidence. This requirement has prompted some ulema to say that the
mujtahid  should have a knowledge of logic ( mantiq ). But this is not strictly a requirement. For logic as
a discipline had not even developed during the time of the Companions, but this did not detract from
their ability to practice  ijtihad .[41. Abu Zahrah, Usul , pp. 308-309; Ghazali, ( Mustasfa , II, 103), considers a knowledge of Arabic, Hadith and
usul al-fiqh to be essential to ijtihad . However the requirement  concerning the knowledge of Usul  would seem to be repetitive in view of the separate conditions
that the mujtahid  must fulfill, such as the knowledge of qiyas and other such requirements, which fall under the subject of Usul .]And finally, the mujtahid  must be an upright (` adil) person who refrains from committing sins and
whose judgement the people can trust. His sincerity must be beyond question and untainted with self-
seeking interests. For  ijtihad is a sacred trust, and anyone who is tainted with heresy and self-
indulgence is unworthy of it.[42. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 101; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 252.] These are the conditions of
independent ijtihad , but a mujtahid  on particular issues need only know all the relevant information
concerning those issues and may, at least according to those who admit the `divisibility' of ijtihad ,
practice ijtihad  in respect of them. His lack of knowledge in matters unrelated to the issues concerned
does not prejudice his competence for  ijtihad .[43. Ghazali, Mustafa , II, 102-103; Kassab, Adwa' , p.38. ]Some observers have suggested that the practice of ijtihad  was abandoned partly because the
qualifications required for its practice were made 'so immaculate and rigorous and were set so high that
they were humanly impossible of fulfilment'.[44. Cf. Fazlur Rahman, Islam , p. 78.] This is, however, an implausible

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 325supposition which has been advanced mainly by the proponents of taqlid  with a view to discouraging
the practice of ijtihad . As for the actual conditions, Abdur Rahim (with many others) has aptly observed
that `the qualifications required of a mujtahid  would seem to be extremely moderate, and there can be
no warrant for supposing that men of the present day are unfitted to acquire such qualifications'. [45. Abdur
Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 174.] There is little evidence to prove that fulfilling the necessary conditions of ijtihad
was beyond the reach of the ulema of later periods. on the contrary, as one observer has pointed out,
`the total knowledge required on the part of the jurist enabled many to undertake ijtihad  in one area of
the law or another'. [46. Hallaq, The Gate , p. 14.] Their task was further facilitated by the legal theory, in
particular the Hadith which absolved the mujtahid  who committed an error from the charge of sin and
even entitled him to a spiritual reward. Furthermore, the recognition in the legal theory of the
divisibility of ijtihad , as we shall presently discuss, enabled the specialist in particular areas of the
Shari`ah to practice ijtihad  even if he was not equally knowledgeable in all of its other disciplines.Divisibility of IjtihadThe question to be discussed here is whether a person who is learned on a particular subject is qualified
to practice ijtihad  in that area, or whether he is required to qualify as a full mujtahid  first in order to be
able to carry out any ijtihad  at all. The majority of ulema have held the view that once a person has
fulfilled the necessary conditions of ijtihad  he is qualified to practice it in all areas of the Shari'ah .
According to this view, the intellectual ability and competence of a mujtahid  cannot be divided into
compartments. Ijtihad , in other words, is indivisible, and we cannot say that a person is a mujtahid  in
the area of matrimonial law and an imitator ( muqallid ) in regard to devotional matters (` ibadat ) or vice-
versa. To say this would be tantamount to a contradiction in terms, as ijtihad  and taqlid  cannot be
combined in one and the same person.[47. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 254, Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.318; Badran, Usul, p.486.] The majority
view is based on the analysis that ijtihad  for the most part consists of formulating an opinion, or zann ,
concerning a rule of the Shari'ah . A zann  of this type occurs only to a fully qualified mujtahid  who has
attained the necessary level of intellectual competence. It is further argued that all the branches of the
Shari`ah are interrelated, and ignorance in one may lead to an error or misjudgment in another. The
majority view is further supported by the argument that once a person has attained the rank of mujtahid
he is no longer permitted to follow others in matters where he can exercise ijtihad  himself.[48. Amidi, Ihkam ,
IV, 204; Shawkani, Irshad , p.255.] Among the majority there are some ulema who have allowed an exception to the
indivisibility of  ijtihad . This is the area of inheritance, which is considered to be self-contained as a
discipline of Shari'ah  law and independent of the knowledge of the other branches. Hence a jurist who
is only knowledgeable in this field may practice  ijtihad in isolation from the other branches of Fiqh .[49.
Kassab, Adwa' , p. 96.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 326Some Maliki, Hanbali and Zahiri ulema have, however, held the view that ijtihad  is divisible. Hence
when a person is learned in a particular area of the Shari`ah he may practice ijtihad  in that area only.
This would in no way violate any of the accepted principles of ijtihad . There is similarly no objection,
according to this view, to the possibility of a person being both a mujtahid  and a muqallid  at the same
time. Thus a mujtahid  may confine the scope of his ijtihad  to the area of his specialisation. This has, in
fact, been the case with many of the prominent Imams who have, on occasions, admitted their lack of
knowledge in regard to particular issues. Imam Malik is said to have admitted in regard to thirty-six
issues at least that he did not know the right answer. But in spite of this, there is no doubt concerning
Malik's competence as a fully-fledged mujtahid .[50. Shawkani, Irshad . p. 255; Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.318; Badran, Usul , p.486.]The view that ijtihad  is divisible is supported by a number of prominent ulema, including Abu'l-Husayn
al-Basri, al-Ghazali, Ibn al-Humam, Ibn Taymiyyah, his disciple Ibn al-Qayyim and al-Shawkani. Al-
Ghazali thus observes that a person may be particularly learned in qiyas  and be able to practice ijtihad
in the form of analogy even if he is not an expert on Hadith. According to the proponents of this view,
if knowledge of all the disciplines of Shari'ah  were to be a requirement, most ulema would fail to meet
it and it would impose a heavy restriction on ijtihad . Al-Shawkani, Badran and al-Kassab have all
observed that this is the preferable of the two views.[51. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 103; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 255; Badran, Usul . p.486.]One might add here that in modern times, in view of the sheer bulk of information and the more rapid
pace of its growth, specialisation in any major area of knowledge would seem to hold the key to
originality and creative ijtihad . Divisibility of ijtihad  would thus seem to be in greater harmony with the
conditions of research in modern times. By way of a postscript, one might also remark that the
classification of mujtahids  into various ranks, such as  mujtahids in a particular school or on particular
issues, takes for granted the idea that ijtihad  is divisible.Procedure of IjtihadSince ijtihad  occurs in a variety of forms, such as qiyas , istihsan , maslahah mursalah , and so on, each
of these is regulated by its own rules. There is, in other words, no uniform procedure for ijtihad as such.
The ulema have nevertheless suggested that in practicing ijtihad , the jurist must first of all look at the
nusus  of the Qur'an and the Hadith, which must be given priority over all other evidences. Should there
be no nass on the matter, then he may resort to the manifest text ( zahir ) of the Qur'an and Hadith and
interpret it while applying the rules pertaining to the general (` amm ) and specific ( khass ), the absolute
and the qualified, and so forth, as the case may be. Should there be no manifest text on the subject in the
Qur'an and the verbal Sunnah , the mujtahid  may resort to the actual ( fi'li) and tacitly approved ( taqriri )
Sunnah . Failing this, he must find out if there is a ruling of ijma` or qiyas  available on the problem in

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 327the works of the renowned jurists. In the absence of any guidance in these works, he may attempt an
original ijtihad  along the lines of qiyas . This would entail a recourse to the Qur'an, the Hadith, or ijma`
for a precedent that has a ` illah identical to that of the far' (i.e.. the case for which a solution is
wanting). When this is identified, he is to apply the principles of qiyas  in order to deduce the necessary
ruling. In the absence of a textual basis on which an analogy could be founded, the mujtahid  may resort
to any of the recognised methods of ijtihad  such as istihsan , maslahah mursalah , istishab , etc, and
derive a solution while applying the rules that ensure the proper implementation of these doctrines.[52.
Shirazi, Luma' , pp. 83-84.]The foregoing procedure has essentially been formulated by al-Shafi'i, who is noted to have observed
the following. When an incident occurs, the mujtahid  must first check the nusus of the Qur'an, but if he
finds none, he must refer to Mutawatir  Hadiths and then to solitary Hadiths. If the necessary guidance is
still not forthcoming, he should postpone recourse to qiyas  until he has looked into the manifest ( zahir )
text of the Qur'an. If he finds a manifest text which is general, he will need to find out if it can be
specified by means of Hadith or qiyas . But if he finds nothing that would specify the manifest text, he
may apply the latter as it stands. Should he fail to find a manifest text in the Qur'an or the Sunnah , he
must look into the madhahib . If he finds a consensus among them, he applies it, otherwise he resorts to
qiyas , but in doing so, he must pay more attention to the general principles of the Shari'ah  than to its
subsidiary detail. If he does not find this possible, and all else fails, then he may apply the principle of
original absence of liability ( al-bara'ah al-asliyyah ). All this must be in full cognizance of the rules that
apply to the conflict of evidences ( al-ta`arud bayn al-adillah ), which means that the mujtahid should
know the methods deployed in reconciling such conflicts, or even eliminating one in favour of the
other, should this prove to be necessary. The ruling so arrived at may be that the matter is obligatory
(wajib ), forbidden ( haram ), reprehensible ( makruh ), or recommended ( mandub ).[53. Shafi'i, Risalah , pp. 261-62;
Shawkani, Irshad , p. 258.]From the viewpoint of the procedure that it employs, ijtihad  may occur in any of the following four
varieties. Firstly, there is the form of a juridical analogy ( qiyas ) which is founded on an effective cause
(`illah). The second variety of ijtihad  consists of a probability ( zann ) without the presence of any ` illah,
such as practicing a ijtihad  in regard to ascertaining the time of salah  or the direction of the qiblah . The
third type of ijtihad
consists of the interpretation of the source materials and the deduction of ahkam  from an existing
evidence. This type of ijtihad  is called ijtihad bayani , or 'explanatory ijtihad ', which takes priority over
'analogical ijtihad ', or ijtihad qiyas . The fourth variety of ijtihad , referred to as  ijtihad istislahi , is based
on maslahah  and seeks to deduce the ahkam
in pursuance of the spirit and purpose of the Shari'ah , which may take the form of istislah , juristic
preference ( istihsan ), the obstruction of means ( sadd al-dhara'i' ), or some other technique. Imam

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 328Shafi`i accepts only the first type, namely analogical ijtihad , but for the majority of ulema, ijtihad  is not
confined to qiyas  and may take the form of any of the foregoing varieties.[54. Kassab, Adwa' , p. 24; Hallaq, The Gate , p.
258.]The Ijtihad  of the Prophet and his CompanionsThe question to be discussed here is whether all the rulings of the Prophet should be regarded as having
been divinely inspired or whether they also partake in ijtihad . The ulema are generally in agreement
that the Prophet practiced ijtihad  in temporal and military affairs, but they have differed as to whether
his rulings in shar'i  matters could properly fall under the rubric of ijtihad . According to the Ash'aris, the
Mu'tazilah, Ibn Hazm al-Zahiri and some Hanbali and Shafi'i ulema, the Qur'an provides clear evidence
that every speech of the Prophet partakes in wahy . A specific reference is thus made to sura al-Najm
(53:3) which provides `He says nothing of his own desire, it is nothing other than revelation [ wahy ] sent
down to him.' This ayah  is quite categorical on the point that the Prophet is guided by divine revelation
and that all his utterances are to be seen in this light. This would mean that all the rulings of the Prophet
consist of divine revelation and that none would occur in the form of  ijtihad .[55. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 255.]The majority of ulema have, however, held that the Prophet in fact practiced ijtihad  just as he was
allowed to do so. This, it is said, is borne out by the numerous ayat of the Qur'an where the Prophet is
invited, along with the rest of the believers, to meditate on the Qur'an and to study and think about the
created world. As for the ayah in sura al-Najm quoted above, the majority of ulema have held that the
reference here is to the Qur'an itself, and not to every word that the Prophet uttered. That this is so is
borne out by the use of the pronoun `it' ( huwa ) in this ayah , which refers to the Qur'an itself. The
majority view adds that the occasion for the revelation ( sha'n al-nuzul ) of this ayah  supports this
interpretation. (The ayah  was revealed in refutation of the unbelievers who claimed that the Qur'an was
the work of the Prophet himself and not the speech of God.) Besides, the Prophet often resorted to
reasoning by way of analogy and  ijtihad, and  did not postpone all matters until the reception of divine
revelation [56. Shawkani, Irshad,  p. 256; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 227.]The minority view on this subject overrules the claim of the practice of ijtihad  by the Prophet and
maintains that if it were true that the Prophet practiced ijtihad , then disagreeing with his views would be
permissible. For it is a characteristic of ijtihad  to allow disagreement and opposition. Opposing the
Prophet is, however, clearly forbidden, and obedience to him is a Qur'anic duty upon every Muslim (al-
Nisa', 4:14 and 58).

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 329There is yet a third opinion on this point which, owing to the conflicting nature of the evidence, advises
total suspension. This view is attributed to al-Shafi'i and upheld by al-Baqillani and al-Ghazali. Al-
Shawkani, however, rejects it by saying that the Qur'an gives us clear indications not only to the effect
that ijtihad  was permissible for the Prophet but also that he was capable of making errors.[57. Shawkani, Irshad ,
p. 256; Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 104.] Nonetheless, the ulema who have maintained this view add that such an error is
not sustained, meaning that any error the Prophet might have made was rectified by the Prophet himself
or through subsequent revelation.[58. Kassab, Adwa' , p. 61.] Thus we find passages in the Qur'an which reproach
the Prophet for his errors. To give an example, a text in sura al-Anfal (8:67) provide,: `It is not proper
for the Prophet to take prisoners [of war] until he has subdued everyone in the earth: This ayah  was
revealed concerning the captives of the battle of Badr. It is reported that seventy persons from the
enemy side were taken prisoner in the battle. The Prophet first consulted Abu Bakr, who suggested that
they should be released against a ransom, whereas `Umar b. al-Khattab held the view that they should
be killed. The Prophet approved of Abu Bakr's view but then the ayah  was revealed which disapproved
of taking ransom from the captives. Elsewhere, in sura al-Tawbah (9:43), in an address to the Prophet,
the text provides: `God granted you pardon, but why did you permit them to do so before it became
clear to you who was telling the truth?' This ayah  was revealed concerning the exemption that the
Prophet granted, prior to investigating the matter, to those who did not participate in the battle of
Tabuk. These and similar passages in the Qur'an indicate that the Prophet had on occasions acted on his
own ijtihad . For had he acted in pursuance of a divine command, there would have been no occasion for
a reprimand, or the granting of divine pardon for his mistakes.[59. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 256; Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 104;
Kassab, Adwa' , p. 61.]The majority view that the Prophet resorted to ijtihad finds further support in the Sunnah . Thus,
according to one Hadith, the Prophet is reported to have said, `When I do not receive a revelation
(wahy ) I adjudicate among you on the basis of my opinion ( ra'y).' [60. Abu Dawud, Susan  (Hasan's trans.), III, 1017, Hadith
no. 3578; Kassab, Adwa' , p.58. For other ahadith  on this point se Shawkani, Irshad , p.256.]The next point to be raised in this connection is whether  ijtihad was lawful for the Companions during
the lifetime of the Prophet. Once again the majority of ulema have held that it was, regardless as to
whether it took place in the presence of the Prophet or in his absence. The ulema have, however,
differed over the details. Ibn Hazm held that such an ijtihad  is valid in matters other than the halal  and
haram , whereas al-Amidi and Ibn al-Hajib have observed that it is only speculative and does not
establish a definitive ruling. There are still others who have held that ijtihad  was lawful for the
Companions only if it took place in the presence of the Prophet, with his permission, or if the Prophet
had approved of it in some way. Those who invalidate ijtihad  for the Companions during the lifetime of
the Prophet maintain that the Companions had access to the Prophet in order to obtain the necessary
authority, which would be decisive and final. If one is able to obtain a decisive ruling on a juridical
matter, ijtihad  which is merely a speculative exercise is unlawful.[61. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 257; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 234.]This view is, however, considered to be weak as it takes for granted ready access to the Prophet; it also

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 330discounts the possibility that certain decisions had to be made by the Companions without delay. The
correct view is therefore that of the majority, which is supported by the fact that the Companions did,
on numerous occasions, practice ijtihad  both in the presence of the Prophet and in his absence. The
Hadith of Mu'adh b. Jabal is quoted as clear authority to the effect that the Prophet authorised Mu'adh to
resort to ijtihad  in his absence (i.e. in the Yemen). [62. Ghazali, Mustasfa , II, 104.] Numerous other names are
quoted, including those of Abu Bakr, Sa'd b. Mu'adh, Amr b. al-'As and Abu Musa al-Ash'ari, who have
delivered ijtihad  in the absence of the Prophet.[63. Shawkani, Irshad , p.257; Zuhayr, Usul, IV, 237.] It is also reported in a
Hadith that when the Prophet authorised `Amr b. al-`As to adjudicate in some disputes, he asked the
Prophet, 'Shall I render ijtihad  while you are present?' To this the Prophet replied, 'Yes. If you are right
in your judgement, you earn two rewards, but if you err, only one.' It is similarly reported that Sa'd b.
Mu'adh rendered a judgment concerning the Jews of Banu Qurayzah in the presence of the Prophet, and
that he approved of it.[64. Shawkan i, Irshad , p. 257; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 80. Ghazali has however expressed some reservations as to the validity of
ijtihad  in the presence of the Prophet, as he considers that unless the Prophet granted permission, ijtihad  in his presence would be discourteous  (Mustasfa , II, 104).]Truth and Fallacy of  IjtihadThe jurists have differed as to whether every mujtahid  can be assumed to be right in his conclusions, or
whether only one of several solutions to a particular problem may be regarded as true to the exclusion
of all others. At the root of this question lies the uncertainty over the unity or plurality of truth in
ijtihad . Has Almighty God predetermined a specific solution to every issue, which alone may be
regarded as right? If the answer to this is in the affirmative then it will follow that there is only one
correct solution to any juridical problem and that all others are erroneous. This would in turn beg the
question of whether it is at all possible for the mujtahid  to commit a sin by rendering an erroneous
ijtihad . In the face of the Hadith which promises a spiritual reward to every mujtahid  regardless of the
accuracy of his conclusions, plus the fact that he is performing a sacred duty-is it theoretically possible
for a mujtahid  to commit a sin?
The ulema are in agreement that in regard to the essentials of dogma, such as the oneness of God
(tawhid ), His attributes, the truth of the Prophethood of Muhammad, the hereafter, and so on, there is
only one truth and anyone, whether a mujtahid  or otherwise, who takes a different view automatically
renounces Islam. [65. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 259.]With regard to juridical or shar'i  matters, the majority of ulema, including the Ash'aris and the
Mu`tazilah, recognise two types:

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 3311) Juridical matters which are determined by a clear and definitive text, such as the obligatoriness of
salah and other pillars of the faith, the prohibition of theft, adultery, and so on. In regard to these
matters, once again, there is only one truth with which the mujtahid  may not differ. Anyone who takes
an exception to it commits a sin, and according to some, even heresy and disbelief.
2) Shar'i matters on which no decisive ruling is found in the sources. There is much disagreement on
this. The Ash'aris and the Mu'tazilah have held the view that ijtihad  in regard to such matters is always
meritorious and partakes in truth regardless of the nature of its results. But according to the four leading
imams and many other ulema, only one of the several opposing views on a particular issue may be said
to be correct. For it is impossible to say that one and the same thing at the same time regarding the same
person could be both lawful and unlawful. [66. Shawkani, Irshad , pp. 260-61; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 238. ] This view has quoted
in support the Qur'anic text where in reference to the two judgements of David and Solomon on one and
the same issue, God validated only one. The text runs:
And when David and Solomon both passed judgement on the field where some people's sheep had
strayed to pasture there at night, We acted as Witnesses for their decision. We made Solomon
understand it. To each We gave discretion and knowledge [ ...] (al-Anbiya', 21:78-79).
Had there been more than one correct solution to a juridical problem, then this ayah  would have upheld
the judgements both of David and Solomon. It is thus suggested that this ayah  confirms the unitary
character of truth in ijtihad . Furthermore, when one looks at the practice of the Companions, it will be
obvious that not only did they admit the possibility of error in their own judgements but that then also
criticised one another. If all of them were to be right in their ijtihad , there would be no point in their
criticising one another or in admitting the possibility of error in their own ijtihad . To give an example,
the Caliph Abu Bakr is reported to have said in regard to the issue of kalalah  (i.e. when the deceased
leaves no parent or child to inherit him): 'I decided the question of kalalah  according to my opinion. If it
is correct, it is an inspiration from God; if it is wrong, then the error is mine and Satan's: [67. Amidi, Ihkam , IV,
187; Ibn al-Qayyim, I`lam , I, 177.] It is further reported that when `Umar b. al-Khattab adjudicated a case, one of
the parties to the dispute who was present at the time said, 'By God this is the truth.' To this the caliph
replied that he did not know whether he had attained the truth, but that he had spared no effort in
striving to do so.[68. Amidi, Ihkam , IV, 187.]The ahadith  and the practice of the Companions on ijtihad  clearly entertain the possibility of error in
ijtihad . A mujtahid  may be right or may have erred, but in either case, his effort is commendable and
worthy of reward.
The opposite view, which is a minority opinion, maintains that there is no pre-determined truth in
regard to ijtihadi  matters. Almighty God has not determined one particular solution as truth to the
exclusion of all others. The result of ijtihad  may thus vary and several verdicts may be regarded as truth

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 332on their merit. This view quotes in support the same Qur'anic text, quoted above, which in its latter part
refers to David and Solomon with the words: To each We gave discretion and knowledge.' Had either of
them committed an error, God would not have praised them thus. It is hence implied that both were
right, and that every mujtahid  attains the truth in his own way. It is further argued that had there been
only one truth in regard to a particular issue, the mujtahid  would not have been bound by the result of
his own ijtihad . His duty to follow his own ijtihad  to the exclusion of anyone else's suggests that every
mujtahid  attains the truth. [69. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 262; Zuhayr, Usul , IV, 239; Kassab, Adwa' , pp. 102-103. ] This view seeks further
support in the rule of Shari'ah  which authorises the Imam or the mujtahid  to appoint as judge another
mujtahid  who may differ with him in ijtihad . This was, for example, the case when Abu Bakr appointed
Zayd b. Thabit as a judge while it was common knowledge among the Companions that Zayd had
differed with Abu Bakr on many issues. Had a difference of opinion in ijtihadi  matters amounted to
divergence from truth and indulgence in error, Abu Bakr would not have appointed Zayd to judicial
office. And lastly, the proponents of this view have referred to the Hadith which reads: `My
Companions are like stars; any one of them that you follow will lead you to the right path.'
Had there been any substance to the idea that truth is unitary, the Prophet would have specified
adherence only to those of his Companions who attained to it.[70. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 262; Amidi,  Ihkam , IV, 152; Zuhayr,
Usul, IV, 241.]These differences may be resolved, as the majority of ulema suggest, in the light of the celebrated
Hadith, which we quote again: 'When a judge renders ijtihad  and gives a right judgement, he will have
two rewards, but if he errs, he will still have earned one reward.' This Hadith clearly shows that the
mujtahid  is either right ( musib ), or in error ( mukhti' ), that some mujtahidun  attain the truth while others
do not; but that sin attaches to neither as they are both rewarded for their efforts. Hence anyone who
maintains that there are as many truths as there are mujtahids  is clearly out of line with the purport of
this Hadith. If every mujtahid  were supposed to be right, then the division of mujtahids  into two types
in this Hadith would have no meaning.[71. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 261.]Classification and RestrictionsIn their drive to impose restrictions on ijtihad , the ulema of usul of the fifth/eleventh century and the
subsequent period classified ijtihad  into several categories. Initially it was divided into two types:
firstly, ijtihad  which aims at deducing the law from the evidence in the sources, often referred to as
'independent ijtihad '; and secondly,  ijtihad which is concerned mainly with the elaboration and
implementation of the law within the confines of a particular school, known as `limited ijtihad' . During
the first two and a half centuries of Islam, there was never any attempt at denying a scholar the right to

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 333find his own solutions to legal problems. It was only at a later period that the question of who was
qualified to practice ijtihad  was raised. From about the middle of the third/ninth century, the idea began
to gain currency that only the great scholars of the past had enjoyed the right to practice ijtihad .[72. Cf.
Schacht, 'Idjtihad', Encyclopedia of Islam , IV, 1029.] This was the beginning of what came to be known as the `closure of
the gate of ijtihad '. Before the fifth/eleventh century, no trace may be found of any attempt to classify
ijtihad  into categories of excellence. Al-Ghazali (d. 505/1111) was the first to divide ijtihad  into two
categories, as noted above.[73. Hallaq, The Gate , p. 18.] This division was later developed into five, and
eventually into seven classes. While representing the prevailing opinion of his time, al-Ghazali admitted
that independent mujtahids  were already extinct.[74. While quoting Ghazali's statement, Shawkani ( Irshad , p. 253) considers it of
questionable validity and adds that Ghazali almost contradicted himself when he said that he did not follow Shafi'i in all his opinions. ] About two
centuries later, the number of the ranks of mujtahidun  reached five, and by the tenth/sixteenth century
seven ranks were distinguished, while from the sixth/twelfth century onwards jurists are said to belong
to only the last two categories on the scale of seven.[75. A more detailed account of the historical development concerning the
classification of ijtihad  can be found in Hallaq, The Gate , p. 84ff.] This is as follows:
1) Full Mujtahid  (mujtahid fi'l-shar' ). This rank is assigned to chose who fulfilled all the requirements
of ijtihad . They deduced the ahkam  from the evidence in the sources, and in so doing were not
restricted by the rules of a particular madhhab . The learned among the Companions, and the leading
jurists of the succeeding generation, like Sa`id b. al-Musayyib and Ibrahim al-Nakha'i, the leading
Imams of the four schools, the leading Imams of the Shi'ah Muhammad al-Baqir and his son ja'far al-
Sadiq, al-Awza'i and many others were identified as independent mujtahids . It is by the authority of
these that consensus of opinion, analogy, juristic preference, maslahah mursalah , etc., were formulated
and established as the secondary proofs of Shari'ah.[76. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 310; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 38; Abdur Rahim,
Jurisprudence , pp. 182-83.] Although Abu Yusuf and al-Shaybani are usually subsumed under the second rank,
Abu Zahrah, who has written extensively on the lives and works of the leading ulema, regards them as
full mujtahids . The criteria of distinguishing the first from the second class of mujtahidun  is originality
and independent thought. If this is deemed to be the case the mere fact that a mujtahid  has concurred
with the opinion of another is immaterial in the determination of his rank. For many of the leading
mujtahids  are known to have concurred with the views of other ulema. For example, it is known that
Abu Hanifah on many occasions agreed with and followed the views of his teacher Ibrahim al-Nakha'i,
but this was only because he was convinced of the accuracy of his reasoning, and not out of imitation
for its own sake.[77. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 310; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 38; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , pp. 182-83.]The question arises whether this type of ijtihad  is still open or came to an end with the so-called closure
of the gate of ijtihad . With the exception of the Hanbalis who maintain that ijtihad  in all of its forms
remains open, the ulema of the other three schools have on the whole acceded to the view that
independent ijtihad  has discontinued. [78. While stating the position of the three Sunni schools on the point, Abu Zahrah ( Usul , p. 311) adds
that this is not definite as, for example, some Hanafis have considered Kamal al-Din ibn al-Humam as a mujtahid  of the first class.] Another related
question that has been extensively debated by the ulema is whether the idea of the total extinction of

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 334mujtahids  at any given period or generation is at all acceptable from the viewpoint of doctrine. Could
the Shari'ah  entertain such a possibility and maintain its own continuation , both at the same time? The
majority of the ulema of usul, including al-Amidi, Ibn al-Hajib, Ibn al-Humam, Ibn al-Subki, and
Zakariya al-Ansari have answered this question in the affirmative, whereas the Hanbalis have held
otherwise. The Hanbalis have argued that  ijtihad is an obligatory duty of the Muslim community whose
total abandonment would amount to an agreement on deviation/error, which is precluded by the Hadith
which states that 'My community shall never agree on an error.' [79. Muslim, Sahih , p. 290, Hadith no. 1095; Shawkani,
Irshad , p. 253; Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 111.]To say that ijtihad  is a wajib , whether ` ayni or kafa'i , takes it for granted that it may never be
discontinued. This is also the implication of another Hadith which provides that 'a section of my ummah
will continue to be on the right path; they will be the dominant force and they will not be vanquished till
the Day of Resurrection.' [80. Muslim, Sahih , p. 290, Hadith no. 1095; Shawkani, Irshad , p. 253; Ghazali, Mustasfa , I, 111.]Since the successful pursuit of truth is not possible without knowledge, the survival of mujtahidun  in
any given age (` asr) is therefore sustained by this Hadith. Furthermore, according to some ulema, the
duty to perform ijtihad  is not fulfilled by means of limited ijtihad  or by practicing the delivery of fatwa
alone. According to the Hanbalis, the claim that ijtihad  has discontinued is to be utterly rejected. Ijtihad
is not only open, but no period may be without a mujtahid . The Shi'ah Imamiyyah have held the same
view. The Shi'ah, however, follow their recognised Imams, in whose absence they may exercise ijtihad
on condition that they adhere, both in principle and in detail, to the rulings of the Imams. In the absence
of any ruling by the Imams, the Shi'ah recognise ` aql as a proof following the Qur'an, the Sunnah , and
the rulings of their Imams.[81. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.312; Kassab, Adwa' , p.112.] And finally, it may be said that the notion
of the discontinuation of ijtihad  would appear to be in conflict with some of the important doctrines of
Shari'ah . The theory of ijma' , for example, and the elaborate procedures relating to qiyas  all proceed on
the assumption that they are the living proofs of the law and contemplate the existence of mujtahidun  in
every age.[82. Cf. Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 174.]2) Mujtahids  within the School. These are jurists who expounded the law within the confines of a
particular school while adhering to the principles laid down by their Imams. Among the prominent
names that feature in this category are Zafar b. al-Hudhayl, Hasan b. Ziyad in the Hanafi school; Isma'il
b. Yahya al-Muzani, 'Uthman Taqi al-Din b. al-Salah and Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti in the Shafi'i; Ibn `Abd
al-Barr and Abu Bakr b. al-`Arabi in the Maliki, and Ibn Taymiyyah and his disciple Ibn Qayyim al-
Jawziyyah in the Hanbali schools. It is observed that although these ulema all followed the doctrines of
their respective schools, nevertheless they did not consider themselves bound to follow their masters in
the implementation of the general principles or in arguments concerning particular issues. This is borne
out by the fact that they have held opinions that were opposed to those of their leading Imams. [83. Abu
Zahrah, Usul , p. 312; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 39; Abdur Rahim, Jurisprudence , p. 183.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 3353) Mujtahids  on Particular Issues. These are jurists who were competent to elucidate and apply the law
in particular cases which were not settled by the jurists of the first and second ranks. They did not
oppose the leading mujtahidun  and generally followed the established principles of their schools. Their
main pre-occupation was to elaborate the law on fresh points which were not clearly determined by the
higher authorities. Scholars like Abu'l-Hasan al-Karkhi and Abu Ja'far al-Tahawi in the Hanafi school,
Abu al-Fadl al-Marwazi and Abu Ishaq al-Shirazi in the Shafi'i, Abu Bakr al-Abhari in the Maliki and
'Amr b. Husayn al-Khiraqi in the Hanbali schools have been placed it this category.
All the preceding three classes were designated as mujtahids , but the remaining four classes of ulema,
as described below have been classified as imitators.[84. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 314; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 40; Aghnides, Muhammedan
Theories , p. 95; Mawsu'ah Jamal , I, 253, and VII, 387.]4) The so-called ashab al-takhrij , who did not deduce the ahkam  but were well conversant in the
doctrine and were able to indicate which view was preferable in cases of ambiguity, or regarding
suitability to prevailing conditions.[85. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 315; Kassab, Adwa' , p. 40; Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 96. ]5) The ashab al-tarjih are those who were competent to make comparisons and distinguish the correct
(sahih ) and the preferred ( rajih , arjah ) and the agreed upon ( mufta  biha) views from the weak ones.
Authors like 'Ala' al-Din al-Kasani and Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani of the Hanafi school, Muhyi al-
Din al-Nawawi of the Shafi'i, Ibn Rushd al-Qurtubi of the Maliki and Muwaffaq al-Din ibn Qudamah of
the Hanbali schools and their equals have been placed in this category.[86. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 315; Kassab, Adwa' , p.
40; Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 96.]6) The so-called ashab al-tashih : those who could distinguish between the manifest ( zahir al-riwayah )
and the rare and obscure ( al-nawadir ) views of the schools of their following. Textbook writers whose
works are in use in the various madhahib  are said to fall into this category.[87. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 315; Kassab,
Adwa' , p. 40; Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 96. ]It will be noted here that the previous three categories are somewhat overlapping and could be unified
under one category to comprise all those who drew comparisons and evaluated the strengths and
weaknesses of the existing views.
7) And finally the muqallidun , or the `imitators', who lack the abilities of the above and comprise all
who do not fall in any of the preceding classes. It is said concerning them that, They do not distinguish
between the lean and the fat, right and left, but get together whatever they find, like the one who gathers
wood in the dark of the night. [88. Abu Zahrah, Usul , p.316.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 336While referring to this classification, Aghnides is probably right in observing that `It implies a
gratuitous assumption that the latter mujtahids could not show greater independence of thought.'[89.
Aghnides, Muhammedan Theories , p. 96.] The restrictions that were imposed on ijtihad  and the ensuing phenomenon
of the 'closing of its gate' are, in the most part, an historical development which could find little if any
support in the legal theory of ijtihad . Similarly, the notion that the ulema, at around the beginning of the
fourth century, reached such an immutable consensus of opinion that further ijtihad was unnecessary is
ill-conceived and untenable.[90. Cf. Weiss, 'Interpretation', p. 208.] The mendacity of such a claim is attested by the
rejection on the part of numerous ulema, including those of the Hanbali and the Shi'ah Imamiyyah, of
the validity of such a consensus.
Authors throughout the Muslim world have begun to criticise taqlid  and advocate the continued validity
of ijtihad  as a divinely prescribed legal principle. A number of most prominent ulema, including Shah
Wali Allah, Muhammad b. Isma'il al-San'ani, Muhammad bin `Ali al-Shawkani and Ibn 'Ali al-Sanusi
led the call for the revival of ijtihad .[91. Further details on developments in the Hijaz and in the Indian subcontinent can be found in Fazlur
Rahman, Islam, p.197 ff; Enayat, Modern Islamic Political Thought , p. 63 ff.] The nineteenth century Salafiyyah movement in
Egypt advocated the renovation of Islam in the light of modern conditions and the total rejection of
taqlid .
AI-Shawkani (d.1255/1839) vehemently denies the claim that independent mujtahidun  have become
extinct, a claim which smacks of 'crass ignorance and is utterly to be rejected'. The same author goes on
to name a number of prominent ulema who have achieved the highest rank of erudition in Shari'ah .
Among the Shafi`is, for example, at least six such ulema can be named who have fulfilled, in an
uninterrupted chain of scholarship, all the requirements of ijtihad . These are 'Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-
Salem and his disciple, Ibn Daqiq al-`Id, then the latter's disciple Muhammad ibn Sayyid al-Nas, then
his disciple Zayn al-Din al-'Iraqi, his disciple Ibn Hajar al-`Asqalani, and his disciple, Jalal al-Din al-
Suyuti. That they were all full mujtahids  is attested by the calibre of their works and the significant
contributions they have made to the Shari'ah . The first two of these are particularly prominent. In his
well-recognised juristic work. At-Bahr al-Muhit, Muhammad b. `Abd Allah al-Zarkashi has
acknowledged that they had both attained the rank of mujtahid . 'It is utter nonsense' writes al-Shawkani,
`to say that God Almighty bestowed the capacity for knowledge and ijtihad  on the bygone generations
of ulema but denied it to the later generations.' What the proponents of taqlid  are saying to us is that we
must know the Qur'an and the Sunnah  through the words of other men while we still have the guidance
in our hands. Praise be to God, this is the greatest lie ( buhtanun 'azim ) and there is no reason in the
world to vindicate it.[92. Shawkani, Irshad , p. 254]Iqbal Lahori considers the alleged closure of the gate of ijtihad  to be 'a pure fiction' suggested partly by
the crystallization of legal thought in Islam, and partly by that intellectual laziness which, especially in
periods of spiritual decay, turns great thinkers into idols. Iqbal continues: if some of the later doctors

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 337have upheld this fiction, 'modern Islam is not bound by this voluntary surrender of intellectual
independence'. [93. Iqbal, Reconstruction , p. 178.]Abu Zahrah is equally critical of the alleged closure of the door of ijtihad . How could anyone be right
in closing the door that God Almighty has opened for the exertion of the human intellect? Anyone who
has advanced this claim could surely have no convincing argument to prove it. Abu Zahrah continues:
the fact that ijtihad  has not been actively pursued has had the chilling effect of moving the people
further away from the sources of the Shari'ah . The tide of taqlid  has carried some so far as to say that
there is no further need to interpret the Qur'an and Hadith now that the door of ijtihad  is closed. In Abu
Zahrah's phrase, 'nothing is further from the truth - and we seek refuge in God from such excesses'. [94.
Abu Zahrah, Usul , p. 318.]ConclusionThe conditions under which ijtihad  was formerly practiced by the ulema of the early periods are no
longer what they were. For one thing, the prevalence of statutory legislation as the main instrument of
government in modern times has led to the imposition of further restrictions on ijtihad . The fact that the
law of the land in the majority of Islamic countries has been confined to the statute book, and the
parallel development whereby the role of interpreting the statute has also been assigned to the courts of
law, has had, all in all, a discouraging effect on ijtihad . The mujtahid  is given no recognised status, nor
is he required to play a definite role in legislation or the administration of justice in the courts. This is
confirmed by the fact that many modern constitutions in Islamic countries are totally silent on ijtihad . It
was this total neglect of ijtihad  which prompted Iqbal to propose, in his well-known work 'The
Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam, that the only way to utilise both  ijma ` and ijtihad  (which
he refers to as the 'principle of movement') into the fabric of modern government is to institutionalise
ijtihad  by making it an integral feature of the legislative function of the state (P. 174).
Essentially the same view has been put forward by al-Tamawi, who points out that ijtihad  by
individuals in the manner that was practiced by the fuqaha' of the past is no longer suitable to modern
conditions. The revival of ijtihad in our times would necessitate efforts which the government must
undertake. Since education is the business and responsibility of modern governments, it should be
possible to provide the necessary education and training that a mujtahid  would need to possess, and to
make attainment to this rank dependent on special qualifications. Al-Tamawi further recommends the
setting up of a council of qualified mujtahids  to advise in the preparation and approval of statutory law
so as to ensure its harmony with Shari'ah  principles. [95. Tamawi, Al-Sulutat , p. 307.]

Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence ~ Kamali 338This is, of course, not to say that the traditional forms of learning in the Shari`ah disciplines, or of the
practice of ijtihad , are obsolete. On the contrary, the contribution that the ulema and scholars can make,
in their individual capacities, to the incessant search for better solutions and more refined alternatives
should never be underestimated. It is further hoped that, for its part, government will also play a
positive role in preserving the best heritage of the traditional modes of learning, and encourage the
ulema to enhance their contribution to law and development. The universities and legal professions in
many Islamic countries are currently committed to the training of lawyers and barristers in the modern
law stream. To initiate a comprehensive and well-defined programme of education for prospective
mujtahids , which would combine training in both the traditional and modern legal disciplines, would
not seem to be beyond the combined capabilities of universities and legal professions possessed of
long-standing experience in Islamic legal education.
Furthermore, in a Shari'ah -oriented government it would seem desirable that the range of selection to
senior advisory, educational and judicial posts would include the qualified mujtahidun . This would
hopefully provide the basis for healthy competition and incentives for high performance among the
candidates, and help to create a definite role for them in the various spheres of government.

